Something happened where they forced my hand and it's the only time that the Soviet
agent was anywhere near me on the territory of the United States.
So I'm waiting for the A train on a dark morning still in Queens and there's this man
in a black trench coat comes up to me from my right and he whispers into my ears, you
gotta come back or else you're dead.
The following is a conversation with Jack Barski, a former KGB spy, author of Deep Under
Cover and the subject of an excellent podcast series called The Agent.
There are very few people who have defected from the KGB and live to tell the story.
It is one of the most powerful intelligence organizations in history and this conversation
gives a window into its operation both from an ideological and psychological perspective.
But also it tells the story of a man who lived one heck of an incredible life.
This is the Lux Friedman podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description and now dear friends, here's
Jack Barski.
Let's start with a big basic question.
What is the KGB?
It's the State Security Committee, this is a threat, and BS means without, and I guess
that directly translates to security without threat.
And don't exist anymore.
It was disbanded when the Soviet Union fell apart and the successor agencies are now the
SVR and the FSB.
FSB supposedly the equivalent to the FBI and SVR, the CIA, but the SVR is relatively weak
and the FSB has taken on a lot of espionage and active measures and they're much bigger
and stronger, but the most capable intelligence agency in Russia is the GRU, military intelligence.
Then nobody knows very much about it.
That's right.
When I was in the KGB, I had no idea that there was military intelligence.
Nobody ever mentioned anything like that.
And by the way, I recently had the pleasure to give a talk at the DIA.
When they reached out to me, I didn't know they existed either.
Interesting.
Yeah, that's always the question.
If you want to be an intelligence agency, should the world know anything about you?
Because in some sense, you want to create the legend in order to attract great competent
individuals to work for you, but at the same time, you want it to be shrouded in complete
mystery.
If nobody knows you exist, you might be able to operate well as an intelligence agency.
That is fascinating, but FSB is the thing that carries the flag of KGB, KGB being probably
one of, if not the most infamous, famous, infamous, and powerful intelligence agencies
ever.
In history, yes.
Ever.
Absolutely, 100%.
It was founded in 1954 after the death of Stalin.
You've, in writing your book, looked back at the predecessors of the history.
Right.
The history in which the KGB is grounded in the culture, the spirit, the soul of its predecessors.
Oh, absolutely.
They just changed names and they changed personnel rather frequently.
I had something to do with Stalin's paranoia.
From between 1923, and I don't remember what, I think it may have been the NKVD at that
time, it started as a chica and then it became the GPU, the NKVD, yes.
But with those name changes, you also had changes at the top.
Between 1923 and 1953 when Stalin died, that is 30 years, they had eight heads of intelligence
and of those eight, six were executed when they were replaced.
So that's an indication that this was an organization that ate itself from the inside.
The Soviet Union was the only dictatorship in history that did not rest its powers on
the military.
They rested its powers on the intelligence apparatus and that thing was unstable.
So you know where that leads.
Eventually, if you rest your power on something that is made out of bricks that don't hold
a lot of load, it will fall apart.
On sand, why was it unstable, would you say?
What if human nature makes it unstable?
It's the paranoia.
Stalin was always worried about the most powerful people coming after him.
So he proactively killed off heads of the KGB and he had this great purge where he got
rid of a lot of his generals, really capable generals and that cost him dearly when World
War II started because he started off with a force that wasn't as capable as it could
have been.
Was it paranoid at all levels?
I believe so.
It comes from the top.
And so if the top doesn't trust you, you always have to worry about your peers snitching on
you.
And I think we have a very similar situation in Russia today and in this kind of atmosphere,
the truth will never get to the top.
So no matter what moral rules the organization operates under, trust is fundamental to its
competence.
Oh, absolutely.
And I want to extend this to my own existence.
And this is kind of strange.
It's almost dichotomous because I was running around lying to everybody and I couldn't fundamentally
be trusted.
But the relationship that I had with the KGB was based on trust.
If they don't trust me, they don't send me out.
And if I don't trust them, I'm not going.
And I eventually broke that trust and they knew there was always that danger.
They knew that because something about you or just something about human beings.
No, there were hints about how long my assignment would be, so 10 to 12 years.
And you see, it makes sense.
I was becoming an American and over time, I would become more and more American.
And there was always a chance that I liked it more here than there, that I was really
successful in what I was supposed to do.
And it sort of happened, but in my case, it happened because of my father, the child who
I didn't want to leave when they wanted me back.
Love always screws up.
Your employment competence, yes.
You absolutely right.
But they thought that I had an anchor at home because I had a wife and a son at home, which
you've got to worry about them if you defect because in the past, the KGB would go after
family ruthlessly.
Doing perhaps violence.
This is a hard question about the KGB because it's one of the most ruthless organizations,
but in general, are there lines, KGB agents at every level of the hierarchy that they
would not cross, political, legal, ethical, or does anything goes to achieve the goal?
I was only in touch with two types of agents, whether the technical experts, the ones that
taught me tradecraft, and they were like engineers and they were in charge of the secret writing
and the Morse code, shortwave, radio reception, decryption, encryption, and that kind of stuff.
These were just doing their job and the others, the ones that trained me, that prepared me
for life in the United States, they were nice people.
They were elegant people.
I don't think they would not fit into the stereotype of the ruthless gun carrying agent.
Is it possible that you would not be aware of the parts of the KGB?
It's very modular.
It's possible that you're not aware of the parts of the KGB that are the muscle?
I didn't know.
I would find out afterwards, after I retired and started doing some research, I had no
clue.
You're operating in a bubble?
Very much so.
This is what the KGB did really, really well, compartmentalization.
That was based on the communist movement while it was still underground.
The cells were very small so that maybe there were three, four members in one cell that
knew one another and then they had a liaison to another cell.
The bottom line is if one of those folks were caught, they could maybe betray four people
or three, something like that, and the KGB continued with that tradition.
I have reason to believe that my handler, the person in Moscow that directed me and made
decisions to do and where to go, never met me personally.
There's no reason to.
And this actually was a big advantage over other intelligence services because you look
at what the CIA does, everybody blabs.
There's a lot of leaks coming out of American intelligence.
I don't think there's as many leaks coming out of the Mossad.
Strong words from Jack Barski, by the way.
That is a question I want to ask a little more systematically.
Is there something unique about the KGB compared to the other intelligence agencies?
Let's talk British intelligence, MI6, Mossad, CIA.
Is there unique cultures, spirits, souls of the different organizations that maybe somehow
connect to the structures of government, connect maybe the values of the people, those kinds
of things?
I believe we were all pretty much strong believers in communism in the future of the
world being.
In KGB.
Yes.
And that unified us to a large degree, even the technicians.
So even it wasn't something like, yeah, yeah, the parents believe this thing, but we know
the truth.
You really believe the story of communism.
Absolutely did.
And you need to look at the timeframe.
The Soviet Union after World War II made quite a bit of progress in influencing the
third world.
And I still remember when I was in middle school, we had a map, the map of the world,
and it was color coded.
So red was communism, that was the Soviet Union and the Eastern states.
And then blue was capitalism.
And then we had green, which were the third world countries.
And the green slowly turned pink because a lot of third world governments, like I'm looking
at Angola, I'm looking at Vietnam, a lot of these countries were very sympathetic to
the Soviet Union.
And so we sort of knew that this would go on like that.
And eventually we would take over and pretty much overtake, that was the myth, overtake
the United States, not only militarily, but also in terms of industrial production and
so forth.
Now that was a stupid pipe dream.
The military, it was a standoff, as we know.
Well, stupid pipe dream, Hitler had a stupid pipe dream that he executed it exceptionally
effectively and on, if not for a handful of military mistakes, a world could look very
different today.
Well, the biggest one being invading the Soviet Union, particularly at the time that he did
it because he ran into the same thing that Napoleon ran into, General Winter.
Well, Operation Barbarossa, within that, he could have made different decisions.
For example, skipping Kiev and attacking Moscow directly overthrowing the government.
So marching, I guess that that would be learning lessons from Napoleon as opposed to a different
kind of distribution of forces and then getting bogged down in the winter.
But the point is, these ambitions sometimes do, you know, the ambitions of empire sometimes
do materialize in the growth and the building and the establishment, those empires and those
empires write the history books in such a way that we don't think of them as empires
or we certainly don't think of them as the bad guys.
They write the history books, therefore, they're the good guys.
And right now, America has effectively written the book about the good guys.
I happen to believe that book, but it's we should be humbled and open minded to realize
that that is, in fact, what is happening is effective empires write the history books and
tell us stories and tell us propaganda and tell us narratives that we believe because
we are human beings and we love to get together and believe ideas.
We love to dream of a beautiful world and try to build that beautiful world together.
In the United States, that's a beautiful world, the freedom of respect of human rights, of
all men are created equal, pursuit of happiness.
You know, it always sounds good.
If you look at what the dream of communism is, it's sure as heck, in its words on the
surface sounds good, respect for the workers, the working class, the lower classes that
have been trodden on, that have been stolen from by the powerful, they deserve to have
the money, the power, the respect that they have earned to their hard work.
Sounds great.
And everybody gets along and we just have to, you know, all men are wonderful people.
And if they go bad, it has something to do with the fact that they have been oppressed.
And that dream just never worked out.
And even it is when you think about it, and I didn't think about it.
When you're young, you just emotionally, you accept it.
But when you think about it, somehow that new, wonderful organization has to organize
itself.
Even though Lenin predicted that the state eventually would go away.
Well, how does it work?
Then you have like anarchy, right?
You have to have an organization.
And the only way to really organize a large number of people is with a hierarchy.
So and who gets to the top?
The ones that want to go to the top, the ones that believe in themselves, the ones that
know better than everybody else.
And once you have that hierarchy established, there is no guarantee that it won't go bad.
And actually, when you look at history, every such hierarchy has gone bad.
You know, you look at Cuba, for instance, I believe Fidel Castro was an honest revolutionary.
I do believe that.
And so what did Cuba turn into?
Yeah, there's something about, and you speak about Vladimir Putin in this way, but let's
step away from that for a second.
Is there something about being an honest revolutionary that wants to do good for their country?
And you start to believe that you know better than everyone else how to do good in the country.
And you very well might first.
But then somehow that grows into a distortion field where you know, you keep believing you
know what's right.
And all the people who disagree with you, you stop seeing them as having a point.
You instead see them as like evil manipulators of the truth that are actually trying to hurt
people for their own greed, for their own power, and you will protect the people because
you know what's good.
In the case of Stalin, I mean, I don't know.
But it seems like he really believed that communism would bring about a much better
world.
I mean, there was a sense, you have to crack a few eggs to make an omelet.
This idea that sacrifice is necessary to bring about a greater world.
And then the other aspect is sort of ruling by terror, creating terrorism, justified political
mechanism to achieve a better world.
So it wasn't, I mean, perhaps he had to do that to be able to sleep at night with the
atrocities he's committing.
I think he believed he will bring about a better world.
And by the way, the terror didn't start with Stalin, it started right after the Bolsheviks
took over when Lenin told Mr. Dzerzhinsky, Kamil Dzerzhinsky, to build the Chekha and
then execute the, this is what he called it, the Red Terror.
So at the birth of the Soviet Union, there was already terror and it was deliberate.
And it also was, it wasn't just focused on the enemies, it was focused on whoever you
didn't like.
There was no rule of law, there was no court cases, people were just pulled out of their
apartments and shot on site.
And this was done by revolutionaries who were convinced that eventually these sacrifices
had to be made and eventually that would lead to a much better planet.
And the populace believed this too, that those sacrifices in part, this is such a dark thing
about dictatorships is you believe it, but you're also too afraid to question your beliefs.
Like, you're not directly afraid, but almost like, I don't know what that is, that's almost
like a subconscious fear.
Like don't, there's a dark room with a locked door, don't look in that door, don't check
that door.
And there's something about the United States that says, especially modern culture, it's
like go to that door first and sort of question everything kind of, that's the power of freedom
of speech and the freedom of the press, but you can get almost become too critical and
too cynical of your own culture in that way.
So there's a balance of strike, of course, but man, if communists are not a lesson of
human nature, I don't know what is, but you believed without thinking too much about it,
you believed in the story of, what did you see?
Just, you know, I came from the Soviet Union, what did you maybe feel that's right and good
about communism, about the vision of communism?
Do you remember?
I think the biggest impetus in me believing in communism was that the communists, just
before Hitler took over, the communists were the only force in Germany that fought the
Nazis in the streets, and that's a historic truth.
And communists were hunted down by the Nazis, killed, put in concentration camps.
And so what we knew, what we were taught, and I think that was a huge unforced error
by the Western countries, particularly the United States, that there were ex Nazis in
the government in West Germany.
And the most famous one was Reinhard Gehlen, who was in charge, was the general in charge
of the intelligence on the Eastern Front, under Hitler.
And when the Allied won the war, it was decided that Gehlen was too important with his knowledge
of his organization, was too important to not use.
So he was corrupted by the CIA and eventually wound up being the head of the Bundesnachrichtendienst,
the CIA of West Germany.
That gave us, when I say us, the East German party a huge propaganda victory.
I wanted to, because the emotional aspect of this was as follows, when we were in juniors
in high school, and in those days, when you were only allowed to go to high school if
you were in the top 10% of students, okay?
So this was going to be the next set of ruling elite in the country.
We were sent, we were required to visit a concentration camp.
And if you know what we, as 17 year olds, were made to look at, it was gut wrenching.
How can men do something like that to men, piles of corpses, lampshades made out of human
skin because that skin had tattoos on them, and a shrunken head, so heads like the size
of my fist, I mean, the girls all cried, and it would have made a huge impression.
And that was the Nazis, and the communists defeated the Nazis.
The communists were the Nazi fighters, they were the good guys.
Of course, in hindsight, if the communists had come to power, it would have been just
the other way around, as we know, given the example of Stalin and Mao, right?
So, but we didn't know that, right?
From the Russian and Soviet perspective, the communist regime banded together to win the
Great Patriotic War.
And that was the second one, you know, the big brother, the Soviet Union, I mean, when
I was approached by the KGB, that was like, oh, I felt so honored.
So, we should say that we're talking about East Germany, that you're from East Germany.
Can you describe, you were born four years, and what is it, four years?
Ten days?
Yeah, sort of, very good.
After World War II.
After Germany's unconditional surrender in World War II.
So what is East Germany, what is West Germany, what is East and West Germany, what is that,
what is the difference, what is the historical context here, what is World War II again,
and then...
Okay, well, let's do for some...
We don't have to go to World War I, which the result of which actually ceded World
War II, in some respects.
Yes, there's a long history, yes.
But let's start with World War II, so when Hitler came to power, he and his leadership
decided that the Germans needed more what they call Lebensraum, that means room to live.
So, and they would start expanding, and they went into France, they took Belgium to Netherlands,
they annexed Austria, and got a piece of Czechoslovakia, and then they decided to march into the
Soviet Union after they took Poland, yeah.
They cut up Poland together with the Soviet Union, and they were friends, they were...
There was a nonaggression pact between, that was signed by Ribbentrop and Molotov, right?
I think both parties knew that eventually they would fall apart, but at the time, it
gave the Soviet Union a little more, a piece of Poland, and a little more time to prepare
what they thought might happen down the road, and the Germans had the time and the ability
to pretty much conquer all of Western Europe.
Do you think Stalin really knew that it's going to fall apart?
Why would somebody like Stalin trust somebody like Hitler?
But why did he blunder so bad not to read the intelligence that was coming his way,
that the troops are amassing on the border of the Soviet Union?
He didn't trust his own intelligence apparatus.
Here's one example, there was a German Communist who went on the ground when Hitler took over
and he went to Japan as a journalist, his name is Richard Sorge.
Richard Sorge had really, really good intel about what the Japanese would do and not do,
and I forgot exactly what it was, but it came to Moscow and Stalin totally ignored it.
And when Sorge was captured by the Japanese, the Soviet Union denied that he was one of
theirs, so he was executed.
The paranoia, again, does a lot of damage.
When you don't believe your own intelligence apparatus, why bother having one?
Yeah, I mean, but I'm sure there's contradictory information coming in from the intelligence
apparatus, so it's difficult, I mean, first of all, nobody likes to be disagreed with,
especially when you become more and more powerful, and the intelligence apparatus is probably
giving information you don't like.
It's often negative information about basically information that says that the decisions you
made in the past are not great decisions, and that's a difficult truth to deal with.
So in the modern times, if we hop around briefly, is Vladimir Putin has been not happy with
the intelligence of the FSB, thereby, at least if you read the news, choosing to put more
priority to the GRU for the intelligence in Ukraine.
But I guess I suppose the same story happens there as it just throughout history is paranoia.
I give you an example that comes from a very reliable source, and that my best German friend
worked as a chemist in the Stasi, East German intelligence, and he eventually, he rose to
the rank of major and was in charge of the forgery department.
It's very likely that he made passports that I used to travel.
He was aware that there was intelligence that was collected, the Stasi was really good.
They had about a thousand people in West Germany, undercover agents, some of them in government,
and the central committee of the party, the decision makers, ignored it because it didn't
quite fit in their worldview, it didn't quite fit into their plans.
So and one delicious thing that I just want to add on to this, when Gorbachev wrote his
book about Perestroika and Glasnost, the East German rulers did not like it, they were
much more orthodox, so they had to print the books in translation, guess where they wound
up?
They were piled up in the hallways of the Stasi, they bought the entire print run.
Fascinating, but let's backtrack Operation Barbarossa, invasion of Hitler to the Soviet
Union, and then hopefully that leads us all the way to East Germany, West Germany after
the end of the war.
So what happened was the Soviet Union rolled into the Eastern part of Germany and the Western
Allies took a larger chunk, which was eventually occupied by the three Allies, the French,
the English and the Americans, and the Eastern part was occupied by the Soviet troops, and
the Soviet troops actually conquered Berlin.
And as in a contract, they decided that Berlin would be ruled by the four Allies, and they
all had free access to that city.
I was born in the East German part, which very quickly became ruled by communists slash
socialists, the Communist Party and the Socialist Party united, but the leaders of that new party
were all communists.
It's nevertheless called Democratic.
Yes, German Democratic Republic, which was formed a couple of months after I was born.
I was born into a remote southeastern corner of East Germany, and interestingly enough,
genetically, I'm only half German.
It's the other half.
The other half is Czech and Polish.
Nice.
And where I grew up, I could walk to the nicer river, which was the border with Poland, and
it was only about an hour by bus to get to the Czech border, so that's why I'm a mix.
So East Germany after the war was communist, socialist, and then the West Germany was representing
the Western world with democracy.
And what the United States did, this was really, really very forward looking, very strategic,
the Marshall Plan to rebuild the economy in the West as compared to what the Soviet Union
did.
Whatever they hadn't destroyed on the way in, they took with them on the way out for reparations,
because they had every right to do that.
But it was not a good idea, because East Germany was always behind in economic development
to their Western counterpart.
So when you were young as today, but when you were young, you were clearly an exceptional
student.
Yeah.
You're a brilliant academic superstar.
Let's go to your childhood.
What's a fond memory from childhood that you have in being woken up to the beauty of this
world and sort of being curious about all the mysteries around you that I think ultimately
lead to academic success?
Or was it?
The fondest memory that comes to mind is my first kiss.
How's that?
Do you want to go to the details of that?
What did you make of that kiss?
What did that teach you about yourself and human nature and all that?
It taught me only in hindsight.
At the time, I was just like, my God, I was head over heels in love.
I was 16 years old.
And I knew in those days, I admired girls.
I knew that girls were like sort of magical beings.
They were not capable of doing evil things.
They were beautiful and they had to be adored.
And one of them actually loved me too.
He came after me initially, right?
And that too was magical for you.
Oh my God, yeah.
And literally, I dedicated, that's when I started studying up until that point, I just
did whatever I had to do to be in A minus students.
And that's when I started studying in every A that I got, I dedicated to her sometimes
explicitly because I knew I was going to take care of her as I grow up.
So you're going to have to work hard in this world to be somebody that could be adored
by those you love.
Yes, you're right.
You know that kiss, the next day, I was running around in school with a grin on my face.
Maybe that in some way, that grin never fades.
So what about the heartbreak that followed?
But just to expand on this a little more because that passion that I had was an indication
that eventually love would play a big role in my life.
I wasn't aware of it.
I was just directed at this one girl.
But that you understood that that feeling that taught you something like that you're
somebody that can feel those things and that's a strong part of who you are and therefore
it will also be a part of directing your life trajectory.
Yeah.
So we were an item for two years.
I lost my virginity.
She was not a virgin at the time.
My competitor was...
There always is a competitor, isn't that how it works?
He studied medicine in college already.
In which ways was he better than you?
He wasn't.
He was older and he was more experienced and he was going to be a doctor.
But I was there and he was not.
Presence wins.
Yeah.
But you still had big dreams.
You wanted to be a 10 year professor.
Yes.
So you still want to all do that guy.
Oh yeah.
And she eventually told me that he was not in a picture anymore.
So it was back and forth, back and forth and our senior year we were an item and I was
just dreaming of the future.
But we didn't figure out that in those days if she went to college in Berlin and I went
to college in Jena and the distance between the two cities was too much for a weekend
visit.
Public transportation was very slow and nobody had cars.
So the circumstance of life you drift a car.
Yeah.
And so we interacted with a couple of letters and then I got the goodbye letter.
Oh my God.
That hurt.
I can still feel it.
You know when that's a good thing that you could feel the pain that's still part of love.
The pain of loss is still part of love and then you kind of change that you shape it
and you give that love in deeper more profound ways to future people.
It's very well put but at the time it emptied me out.
If I had a tendency to have suicidal thoughts I might have killed myself.
Would you say that was one of the darker moments of your life?
Let me see.
As a single moment yes.
So I still remember we had a mail slot in the front door and I was expecting a letter
any day and there was the letter I go upstairs into my bedroom and I open it and I read it
and it's just like the life went out of me.
Just there alone and you have to experience this pain alone.
So but now you're deeply alone in this world.
Yes because I didn't have a there was no emotional relationship with my parents.
I literally had nobody.
So this love you have in you had no place to go.
It was choked off.
But what I did was I wanted to go on.
And so I threw myself into the study of chemistry.
I outworked all of my fellow students in a big way.
I just like I worked my ass off and since I was pretty smart too I just ace practically
everything.
And for the first two years in college and look we go to college they're all these pretty
girls and there's dances and everything.
We had this this great student club where I didn't look at any girls like I eventually
I knew I was going to you want to have female companionship but love no more that hurts.
There's a song that goes love hurts.
Yeah and I know that one.
That's true.
There's actually many songs that have a similar message yes.
So during that time during your excellence just being an exceptional student of chemistry
let's go to your story.
So in your book Deep Undercover My Secret Life entangled the allegiances as a KGB spy in
America and in the really really excellent podcast series that I've been listening to
it's people should definitely listen to it's called The Agent.
You document your time as a KGB spy before during and after.
Can you tell the story of when you first were contacted by the KGB those how you were invited
the offer to join was made.
Well it was a big surprise and I never thought of myself as a potential agent you know I
was going to be a tenured professor and joined the ruling elite because in Europe tenured
professors are few it's not like in the United States you know anybody who teaches at colleges
as a title of professor.
Easy now.
It's true.
Yes.
That's not a criticism.
100%.
I would clarify that tenured professor or not it is a very prestigious position throughout
history of Europe and I would say especially communists I don't actually know the full
landscape of the respect but at least in the Soviet Union where I grew up it's a prestigious
position.
Absolutely was.
And the town had about 100,000 people there and it's a wild guess but maybe 30 tenured
professors and they were part of the ruling elite.
I was trying to do it as much as I can to live the good life right you know have access
to things that are nice.
Yeah but I think the powerful thing about being a professor in that context of East
Germany is the prestige.
And the feeling of superiority you know I was full of myself you know when you are the
best of the best and my third year I received a scholarship the Karl Marx scholarship that
was limited to 100 concurrent recipients in the country so my god you know I was full
of myself.
I believed in myself hook line and sinker and I was also I got a lot of accolades from
teachers and fellow students.
They were feeding the ego the old I mean you have to believe in yourself often when you
are young to truly to excel and you sure as I did.
But you know as a balance you need a mentor somebody who puts things in perspective and
I didn't have one.
My father was a non entity and nobody else they all looked up to me.
I was an up and coming guy right.
So there's no father figure that put you in your place.
Not at all and I give you one extreme example it was down the road when I fathered a child
out of wedlock that was in my fifth year I believe.
The Communist Party in East Germany was very moralistic.
If you did that they would have a talk with you and give you whatever a severe reprimand.
Nobody even mentioned a word about this.
So yeah so this is this is how this ego gets nurtured.
But anyway getting back to how the KGB came in contact.
So they most likely got knowledge of me by you know looking at Stasi records.
What Stasi.
Oh that was East German secret police start security for the state.
There's that word security again.
And that they pretty much kept a record on everybody in the country and so when you when
you look through this and this is what the KGB was looking for.
They were looking for candidates particularly for this kind of job that they had in mind
for me for candidates who were not you know in their mid 20s who were not fully developed
yet but mature enough to get there and still young enough right.
Because at that level of maturity you can test whether they can handle this kind of
job.
Yes absolutely right.
So and one day I got a knock on my door and my dorm room door was on a Saturday and they
knew that I was by myself how did they know it we had a I pieced this together.
We had an exchange student from the Soviet Union and he was next door to me and he you
know he befriended me so he got to know me a little bit and the pattern was that my roommate
would always go home for the weekend.
And of course they also knew which door to knock on even though there were no nameplates
right.
Somebody knocks and I knew it was a stranger because if it had been a student the pattern
was that we would knock on the door and then go in.
We wouldn't wait for somebody to let us in.
So I didn't wait it for 10 seconds and he didn't come in.
I knew that it was a stranger and said come on in and then came a person who spoke fluent
German so that was not a KGB guide it was a collaborator.
And so he started making a bunch of small talk he introduced himself as the as a representative
of Carl Zeiss Jena which was the optics company that made there was made really really good
optical instruments was one of the best in the world.
So it's like though you know there's the super prestigious company in that place.
And he said you know that he was a representative of that company and he would just want to
find out what my plans were after graduating from college and at that point I knew he wasn't
from Carl Zeiss Jena because in those days there was no recruitment.
You when you were done if you were in the top 10 percent of the graduates you would
most likely pick to stay and get a doctorate right.
And the rest of them were assigned you know where you had no choice.
So that guy was an idiot.
He didn't know the basics about you interviewed him a little bit to understand like oh sure
you know I you know I started like feel out is this guy full of shit because yeah he's
a stranger showing up to your dormant.
I knew that at that point I knew he was Stasi which is wrong but it doesn't matter because
he was German and I had no idea that the KGB would be involved.
So sorry to pause briefly.
Did you have a sense.
Did people know that there's a Stasi type of organization that there is a large number
of people doing this kind of work in East Germany in order for you to make that guess.
Yeah we knew that the Stasi existed.
We even had our James Bond you know we had a series called the invisible visor when a
Stasi employee in East Germany would go into West Germany and hunt down Nazis.
So yes the Stasi was known to be there.
And admired in part or feared or both.
I thought they were necessary and I admired them.
James Bond.
Yes the reason I did so because I had no information to the contrary I never knew anybody personally
or even you know somewhat removed who was followed by the Stasi was you know put in
jail I had no clue that they did a lot of damage and that they were like doing a lot
of surveillance of the East German population the same way the KGB did for the Soviet Union.
So for me to be talking to somebody from the Stasi it was it raised my interest.
I was curious what comes next because I sort of knew something interesting would be coming
at me and I had no I had no other thoughts about that at that point.
So when when he was finally when he he went in he went for the kill by reversing himself
he said you know I got to tell you that I really I really am not from Karl Zeiss Jena
I'm from the government okay thank you for pointing that out.
And then he asked this question he says can you imagine to one day work for the government
and so I gave a pretty clever answer I said yes but not as a chemist.
So we I answered the question that he didn't ask I helped him out.
So we made an arrangement to meet for lunch which in Germany is the main meal at the number
one restaurant in Jena I still remember what I ate what was that rum steak with butter on
top and french fries was my favorite.
Anyway so when I get to the restaurant I saw this fellow sitting in the back there at the
table and there was another person at the table.
So I was a little bit hesitant because in those days it was not unusual for perfect
strangers to share a table because there wasn't wouldn't enough tables and chairs and so forth.
So I didn't know if I could approach him but he he got up and came to me and he took me
to the table and he said I want to introduce Herman we work with our Soviet comrades KGB
and then he disappeared he says I got something else to do I never knew his name he just handed
me over to the KGB.
What was the relationship between the KGB and the Stazis as collaborators close collaborators
or just distant associates.
They were pretty close collaborators as I told you that you know they they bought forged
documents that the Germans made because the Germans were better at forgery.
They also exchanged information but they didn't trust each other 100% and and and I and I tell
you why I know that so they recruited me to send me to West Germany.
As I already said East Germany had a thousand agents over there why would they have to want
to have their own.
Yeah yeah okay this is fascinating internal and external dynamic of distrust yeah okay
so there you are welcomed by the KGB when did the offer the invite come well that took
a while so Herman and I had an unofficial relationship for about a year and a half.
I would meet him once a week once every two weeks initially in his car but then he took
me to a conspirational flat that was an apartment that was occupied by a party member a lady
single lady when we came in she would leave she left us tea and cookies and then we could
freely talk he also at that time gave me some West German literature magazines to read
which was of course forbidden so already starting to feel somewhat special and as we were talking
about what they had in mind for me in general I knew that I was going to be even more special
because I would be above the law I would operate outside the law of the countries I would go
to as well as East Germany because you know the magazines and eventually when I joined
up they told me I had better watch West German television which was also not explicitly prohibited
but it was something that could get you in trouble so on many levels you're super special
you're the jazz bond yes yes so what was that recruitment testing process like testing
whether you are you have what it takes to be a KGB agent first of all we had very in
depth talks me Herman and I about life and I was I still am very honest and sharing my
feelings philosophical or personal personal I even I even told him that I was shy around
the girls he was giving you a relationship advice or what was the dynamic can you tell
me was it a father son brother brother yeah he was maybe in his early to mid 30s and I
was maybe 10 years younger and what languages did he speak he spoke German he spoke German
pretty well but he's originally from Russia yeah with a Russian accent so I got in trouble
one time with him when when I asked him is your real name German he didn't like that
he didn't like it what was he good with girls was was no no you know I remember what he
told me he says you know you got to understand one thing they're looking for guys too that's
that's all no girls are looking at yeah it's a competitive game yeah yeah don't don't
don't worry about it you know don't be so shy so that little flame of love that we talked
about yeah in all the shapes that it takes in our life did he talk to you about that that
could be taken advantage of that that could be used or was it implied yeah but not in
it was not very focused not in great detail so let's so we talked about personal stuff
and you know like dislikes he gave me tasks for instance when my friend and I hitchhiked
from from East Germany all the way down to Bulgaria he told me to write a report about
it what I saw so fundamentally he wanted to see how well I can I can write and how well
I can report how well I observe he also asked me to write some profiles about fellow students
I don't believe that was for them to give him to the Stasi it was just like how well
do I characterize people what's it that's important when you're talking about when I
was in the u.s. active in the u.s. I operated as a spotter so I did exactly that I wrote
profiles about people he also gave me some tasks to do that were rather unpleasant quite
he would give me an address and a name of the people who lived at the address and he
told me to go there ring the doorbell and find out something about a relative who lived
in West Germany that is undercover exploration right so you go you you make up a story and
somehow win the confidence of your target to tell you something that you want to know
was that did that come naturally to you no no I hated it the charisma involved which
part did you hear charisma I think I didn't know that I had it it took you some time
to discover because you know I was I always was and I still am to some degree a bit shy
I lost a lot of the shyness of after moving to the south because here in the United States
because you don't have to be shy you know you can let your love shine that's exactly
right so but anyway I hate it doing that but I did it well I still remember so I and those
days I had a I had a beard and I and I rang the bell and all handsome fella yeah and and
I looked the part I said I'm a sociology student and I'm doing a survey and I asked
a whole bunch of questions get would you like to answer the questions there's no problem
and then I directed the conversation to the ladies private life and and she actually gave
me information she volunteered information that I wanted to know beautiful I did well
and the other one that I didn't like but I also did well with when when Herman drove
me around the city and showed me a building and he said find out what organization is
in there what they do maybe get to know some people and I did that pretty well also you
know you have to be inventive you know to to come up with a cover story and and I've
always been quite inventive you know I'm a storyteller at heart and that I didn't know
it then but that you know but there was still something unpleasant about it yes yes which
part was the shyness and then you know you know I wasn't very comfortable lying I became
comfortable down the road but you know I was prudely honest and never never hit anything
of me but you know over time you lose that that uncomfortable feeling and you rationalize
that you got to do it there's only one way right and you're serving a good cause so you
were talking to Herman for a year and a half year and a half and then how did that progress
yes so he said he finally I guess he sent a report to headquarters in Berlin and then
he sent me on a three week quote unquote practice trip to Berlin as was the first time when
I had a like a conspiracy conspiratorial meeting where I would I had an address in a time and
a code phrase and I met another agent his name was Boris these names meet were meaningless
they were all like cover names right so what was the code in the mean what was then what
can you give a little more that code I don't remember no but not the code but like what
do you mean by code so I tell you my the the code we use when I when I met while I was
active I would approach the other person who I thought maybe the person I want to meet we
both had some something to with us or on us to make us more likely to be the right person
so and I would I would ask him the following questions excuse me or I'm looking for Susan
Green and he and he would answer yes you must be David stupid if if I if I ask a stranger
and they would look at me well how could I help you so yeah no it's the wrong guy yeah
it's just a low probability that the right thing would be absolutely and it seems like
a safe statement yes it's not the right person exactly right just come off you sir or crazy
or whatever you would have you would have made a good secret agent you know you know
I'm not this is this is we'll discuss this dress like one actually yeah where there's
any dress code no just fit in fit in no matter what and then be creative yeah figure out ways
to write so anyways he give me some tasks and we and he since I had rented a room in a house
he gave me a western literature to read and we spent time together and there was a practice
run to West Germany actually there were two and that was very important in hindsight I
figured that out so I traveled to West Germany and no not to West Berlin with an East German
passport that was stamped that that individual was allowed to go to the West and there was
a part of the border that was only guarded by Soviet troops and that's where they smuggled
me into West Germany I got on the subway and and then appeared in West Berlin no no Americans
no Brits no French knew that I had entered for his documents or not no no this was a
an East German passport it was real okay okay so and the first trip all they wanted me to
do is just walk around you know smell the air you know have a beer or whatever and eat a sausage
and then come back the second trip I had a task very similar to the one that I had back in
Jena to ring the doorbell some place and talk to some people and that worked very well is also
I should mention that you talk about that you know eat a sausage drink some beer I suppose
that's a good test too to see how you behave under Western like when first introduced to the
Western college like this is why I might not make a good agent is when I first came to the
United States and supermarket like bananas as many bananas as I want to eat that I think
how that I think that would break me it's just it's a shock to be to have access to Western
culture you're getting very close to the reason they actually made me do this these two practice
trips the at when I first emerged on West Berlin territory I felt highly uncomfortable
that was at the enemy right yeah and I saw the cops everywhere and even those though those
cops had like light blue uniforms nothing they weren't standouts so I was wondering you know
if they knew that you know I had like KGB yeah on my forehead you are paranoid that they would
know they would see I was scared but I overcame that so that's oh can we just linger on that
because I suppose that's a natural like if I give anybody on the street the mission to do the
mission you have to do is they would be paranoid that's a natural human feeling is am I being
watched do they know like if you try to steal something from a store there's going to be a
feeling like are they watching me or the cameras watching the people watching me they all know
that kind of stuff so you have to over oh you have to be somehow rugged and robust to that kind
of feeling it all overcome it yes exactly so and something very interesting happened while I was
being trained in Berlin I met a classmate of mine from high school and he confided to me that he
was recruited by the Stasi to become a spy go as a spy to West Germany and he also had this
practice trip and he peed in his pants he went back and told him I can't do that just from the
terror the yes that paranoia now this guy's career was over he had a he had an he had an
engineering degree he was a pretty smart guy he he was just for the rest of his life and he's still
alive I believe floating around and you know trading in model railroads and stuff like that
you mean do you think that experience broke him or they wouldn't let him back in oh I see they
yeah so this is a test that if you fail you pay the price I had no idea that that you know
no something bad would happen if I fail that test but I didn't yeah I didn't fail so and this led
then to the offer all right after you know Boris was happy with me and he told his boss who was
most likely the the head of the KGB in East Berlin and I had an appointment to meet in East Germany
yes in East Germany yeah all of East Germany yes that's right an appointment to meet with him
and as we walk into the room there was this huge desk and a little guy sitting behind it
very very uh just like little and not unimpressive nice a lot of paraphernalia like you know had a
bust of Zhazinsky on on on his desk and and some some paintings Lenin and so forth but when the
guy opened his mouth he was like whoa huge psychological energy he spoke only Russian
now and initially he would you know start to bet with five minutes worth of propaganda why we're
doing what we're doing I didn't need that I understood most of it but what I when when I
didn't understand I asked Boris to translate and then then he sprung it on me and I was not prepared
he he said so what are you in or not I was no I'm gonna I hadn't made up my mind I wasn't expecting
that would come and so I said to him I'm not really trained you know there's a lot of things I need
to learn and I came up with a couple of really stupid things one not so stupid but the other
one was I don't know why I said that I said for instance I need to learn how to drive a car
and to type with a typewriter and he was he got really annoyed and he said don't worry about it
we'll train you yeah but I gotta tell you we need people who are decisive so I you got until tomorrow
noon to give Boris your decision that made for a sleepless night so what was going through your
mind well I had this was almost 50 50 I knew I was gonna have a huge career a good career
I would I was on my way because you know this I was already employed by the university as an
assistant professor so that career would be to become a professor become a ten year professor
be a world class yes Yena had become my hometown I really loved the place it was my oyster
and and my family was my basketball team I was you love playing basketball absolutely you mean
yeah so this is home this is home this is where your love is this is home did you understand
that the choice involved leaving yes home behind yes and and the one thing I didn't have
the two things I didn't have an emotional relationship with my mother
and I didn't have a steady girlfriend at the time I think Freud would have a lot to say about that
but yeah go ahead but the connection between those two but yeah I'm sure by the way my my friend
Gunther one who worked for the Stasi was also the Stasi tried to recruit him as an agent but he
had a love relationship at the time and he said politely no I won't I can't so you didn't have
that's the one thing that really could would have helped me would have held you to this place
is love so you got the career on the one hand my basketball team the town that I would be part
of the ruling elite of and then we had this great adventure and the ability to contribute
to the victory the worldwide victory of communism and and stick it to the Nazis and of course the
feeling that you're really special yeah James Bond yeah what's the question do I want to be a
tenure professor or James Bond yes and and that as funny as that sounds that was probably a difficult
decision it was a difficult decision but fundamentally it wasn't it and it wasn't my zeal
to to help the revolution it was my my what they called what the Stasi was looking for
the KGB was looking for in a character that they would send over a well controlled inclination
to adventure okay yeah yeah James Bond what do you say and the love of women yeah I was
yes but I gotta put this in right here because I'm telling people I have two things in common
with James Bond these are my initials JB and and I got the girl too three times yeah I mean
there that's and that's adventure yeah and and and the ability to travel to the west because
the west was closed off to us we could go to foreign countries but they all had to be communist
countries you know I wanted to see Paris because I I had fallen in love with the Honore Balzac who
wrote a phenomenal set of novels that I just ate up and so I when I eventually did go to Paris I
knew all the places already because he described them all but anyway so that one it was a it was
51 49 but eventually it you know when you when you do the side by side intellectual comparison
that doesn't work it becomes a tie and then you know you just go with your gut and I say I'm in
so now that you successfully passed the test and you were sitting with this unimpressive man and
had the invite and had to sleep on it and have made the decision to join yeah what was next I
was just told you you know that I was being recruited by the state department of East
Germany I was going to become a diplomat I must have had some paper but I forgot because
just by saying so then that would that wouldn't have worked there's some kind of document that
says the game yeah that was the only entanglement you had to that to that place no love no basketball
basketball giving up basketball was huge for me I loved playing that game I started playing
basketball when I was 18 that's a little late are you better offensive defensive what do you like
more do you like to shoot from a distance do you like I was a runner I was very very quick on my
feet and I was a good jumper too I typically played the the four position you know what's that
forward oh the forward position forward position but anyway so that that that was the hardest
for me to give up but indeed the other thing that I remember I had to do to hand in my party
document to the party secretary of the university and he made a comment yeah we probably won't
hear much about you but we know that you're going to do something very important so he sort of had
an had an inkling that I'm going I'm going to go someplace on the cover or something like that
and then I packed my bags and got on a train to Berlin for another one of those secret meetings
with my my new handler Nicolai so and here here came another test that that would have been quite
easy to fail so I had lived in Vienna for six years in a dorm even when I became an employee
of the university they didn't they didn't have apartments I was still living in a dorm and
and he won in a single room with a bed a chair and a table and toilet down the down the hallway
so I figured you know Berlin KGB I'm gonna get a nice apartment right and so Nicolai
took me into his car we started talking a little bit and then he said I have a task for you already
your first task is to find yourself a place to live I mean I don't think I showed it in my face
but you know my heart my my my heart dropped like down to into my pants I I knew this was
nearly impossible because there was a severe shortage of housing and in everywhere in Germany
East Germany and all the apartments and homes were controlled by by the government you you know
there were long waiting lists and I know I knew couples that were promised maybe to get an apartment
five years down the road so and then they would postpone the decision to have a child anyway this
was impossible oh well you know but this was a test okay and so because I had to be inventive now
I had to figure out how to get out of an impossible situation I didn't realize it then at all I just
went with a flow you know what do I do so what I did I went I took the the train the city train
to the very last stop a little town called Akna and I wandered around in that town and
knocked on doors and asked people if they knew where somebody might have a place to live and
after a couple hours somebody said there's this lady that and she gave and they gave me the address
and I talked to the lady and she said I happen to have a place that you might that where you might
be able to stay it was an outbuilding I don't know what it what it served it was not a garage
it was concrete and it had a bed and a chair a running cold water and a stove a cold stove
that was my was going to be pretty basic pretty basic that's your basis are you kidding me that's
the uh toilet across the yard of course yeah well all the essentials what are you complaining about
so you were right you're right you had to run the uh the special the James Bond had to run a
special operation out of the yes outhouse to to to my credit and I think that that uh
that established part of my reputation I didn't complain at all to Nicolai that was part of the
test problem yeah I just told him you know I found something and so uh for six months I would get up
in the morning get on the train and walk around in the city you know did some operational stuff
operational training I went to the library did a lot of reading in the library and then I found
the basketball team that I could join so at least I could take a shower twice a week and
and apparently I took about six months that I was still on probation because after six
months Nicolai one day we were still meeting in his car he said he handed me a key he said
I'm going to take you to your new apartment
and now and I didn't know this you know that now I was really in okay imagine the hurdles you
have to jump over and how many times you can fail but you know but not complaining not asking
questions yes I mean that was something you've written about um I think you wrote that bosses
do not like to hear complaints or problems they prefer solutions that's right so what was your
interaction like with the bosses is that essentially um represents the way it went forward as well
I no complaints get no complaints no arguments no no I know this better I was taking it all in
now that the the the technical guys you know they taught me something I didn't know that made sense
um what Nicolai some of the stuff that he taught me
was somewhat questionable he was a generalist and there's some things he didn't know really well
so I could have like asked and probed a little bit but I didn't so I just played along so this new
apartment was uh it was a studio it had a kitchen with running cold water and the bathroom was just
one flight down the toilet not a bathroom one flight down the the stairs an upgrade it was a
big upgrade and he gave me uh I think he gave me a thousand mark to buy by furniture and in that
place I actually I also bought a tv and started watching west german television so so it I finally
had a decent place to stay um and the the my training in berlin took about two years what was
the training what were the interesting aspects to the training what were sort of if you do an
overview systematic of what was the training process what was difficult what are some insights
that generalize to the training process of what it takes to be a kgb spy right so uh let me start
with a tradecraft so I was taught morse code that took a while uh I I was instructed in how to you
know use a shortwave radio and to receive uh the the shortwave uh transmissions with morse code
I was taught uh uh an encryption and decryption algorithm manual algorithm yep you you might
be interested that eventually I figured out uh at least one of the patterns uh the the algorithm
was such that the and this was all about digits like uh and the algorithm was such that in the end
the uh the digits that were used to decipher other digits that were handed that were sent to me
via shortwave radio there were let's say if there were a hundred digits there were an equal number
of ones twos threes fours five six and seven and up until zero and I was told that uh these
algorithms these manual algorithms were were good for about 300 uses after that they could still be
deciphered I'm assuming nowadays that wouldn't take as much yeah with with computers for sure
but there's probably they're probably designed in a way that you can manually
sort of it's efficient and convenient to use them manually well it's not to optimize cryptographic
security it's to optimize it's like to balance security and like humans being able to actually
yeah no I gotta disagree it was neither efficient nor convenient it would took a long time so
when what was what was significantly easier to do uh but uh that would require you to have
spy paraphernalia with you this is what's called a one time pad so you have the the set of numbers
on on a sheet of paper uh that had to be developed I had to use iodine to make those numbers visible
those are known to be uh unbreakable unless they are used multiple times the same the same
sheet of paper because you know the person who encrypts has the same set of numbers as the
person who decrypts and one one time use you cannot figure out what the message is oh interesting
but this is the quick way to communicate from one person to another one time one time well one
time when I had a pad with multiple uh sheets of paper right and uh the reason that they gave me
a manual one is because I literally I had only when I when I wound up in the United States I had
only one thing with me that uh only a spy can have and that was a uh a writing pad with uh
where the first 10 pages or so were impregnated with a trace of a chemical that was used for
secret writing uh but you really would have to know what you're looking for to you know you see
this pad it was bought at you know Walmart and can you explain a little little further what
what is the chemical here that what are we talking about so how I don't understand how it's possible
to have a physical pad that does the encryption without any computing I how does it incorporate
so so no no it doesn't it doesn't do any work you know so and the uh the communication that
the encrypted communication was uh was a set of uh groups of five five digits and then another five
and there's always a gap in between um and uh so let's say if I get this radio transmission
I write them all down and then I then I use my develop my algorithm and then I do mathematics
either addition or subtraction the resulting set of digits had then had a one to one correlation
to letters and this is an easy way to then do the correlation yes well that's cool that's uh
and you're saying the algorithm was not efficient it was not oh the manual that took a long time
and and you can't make an error right uh would you know where can you it's easy to debug no you
no you do it twice you do it twice and that's how you check if it's identical then you know
well like if it's not if it's not then then one is right and the other is wrong you gotta
make mistakes no that's right and I really didn't but anyway um so I was I was learning that
uh I was also uh told that I was required to become proficient in another language
and they gave me a choice and I picked English that's what was the other one oh no they gave
them pick one friend you know whatever is spoken in the west got it uh what was what was what would
be second to you would you would you think French because of Paris what would you what why English
English wasn't no brainer because I I was a straight A to A student in English without studying
and I like it came so easily to me yeah so that's why I chose it right so that was that then
I was taught the basics of counter surveillance you know some trickery and and surveillance
detection routes where you wander around in the city for three hours and determine whether
you're being followed or not that requires you to plan the route very well I give you one example
that that will illustrate that as my my favorite spot when when when I was in Moscow I did a lot
of that also uh and if my favorite spot was I was a not well traveled uh uh road it went down the
hill and and curved and at the bottom of the hill there was a telephone booth and when you open the
door and and pick up the telephone you have to look back so it wasn't like this right it wasn't a
giveaway this was normal it was natural so yeah I could see if somebody would come walking after
me you know these kinds of things or you would uh you know use public transportation uh big
buildings uh where you needed to use an elevator and see who's because surveillance the the object
of surveillance is to never lose sight of the individual who you're surveilling because at that
point you may miss the window where he does something that that you're looking for so somebody
always has to come close right did you have to also study surveillance no only counter surveillance
and what helped me in in in all my training uh you know I would be uh would have a competition
with the folks that were coming that were following me and me and I beat them every time uh they were
at a disadvantage because one of them always had to be close and and if you saw the same face twice
you know that you were being followed and I had a very very good uh memory for for faces so basically
figure out a fixed route and then a fixed route that allows you to uh survey the area and then record
the faces you've seen yeah inside your mind and if uh you see multiple times a single face that's
that's a bad sign and and they they could they could uh you use uh different clothes yeah uh
but they didn't have was face masks yeah the CIA does nowadays they can give you a different
face with within seconds yeah so how I mean again you talk about paranoia uh
um is that part of the is that a big part of the job uh counter surveillance like being constant
paranoid that you're being watched yeah I was supposed to isn't that quite stressful so is that
is that one of the is that actually an effective way to operate nobody it sort of becomes a routine
I was told to do it uh while in the US once a month and uh okay it's like a cleaning out oh not
not every day no no no no no once a month or before I would say mail a letter with secret writing
so I was sure that you know nobody saw me put an envelope into uh post box so this is one of the
tools in your toolbox so there's morse code there's yes the decryption and the encryption there's the
counter surveillance photography and making making micro dots you know what a micro dot is
well that's uh that's uh you use you take a photograph and you use a microscope in reverse
and make that photograph really small so small that it's like the the head of a pin
that can be used to to hide under a postage stamp
um and reality I knew how to make them but in reality they they never asked me to to make
use of that technique so it's a sort of an encryption mechanism for photographs
yeah so what we do nowadays and embed uh code in in uh PDFs and stuff like that right yeah
beautiful okay all right so that that was a learning a training process both in the physical space
and sort of um yes algorithmically is there other things oh yeah you bet uh interestingly enough the
I was um the first book I was given to read was the history of this uh these communist party of the
soviet union oh so understand yeah that's interesting because you said you had to read western
literature yeah that too how much how much reading so history how much history of politics
geopolitics not culture but they made me read that document uh other than that I wasn't supposed to
study the soviet union I wasn't supposed and that that was not and I didn't when they sent me to
Moscow it wasn't to learn russia russian right it was to learn english um the the second document
they gave me was the the constitution of west Germany and then I got lots of magazines and
stuff like that uh as I told you I was uh also told to uh watch west german television which I
which I uh embraced with a vengeance because it was better than east german so I would get up
in the morning and have a little breakfast and watch the german version of sesame street
and that that that helps you um that helps you get an understanding of the culture because
if you have to do any kind of uh interaction yes kind of spying then you have to be in be able
to effectively integrate well you you also have to know like and that would have been easier uh
if I they had sent me to west Germany you know all the soccer teams you know stuff that everybody
knows when I came to the u.s. I knew very little stuff that everybody knows that's why I had to
be very cautious and you know take it in over time anyway uh and the the last thing I want to mention
is uh they I was strongly encouraged to uh expand my my cultural education in other words
go to visit museums uh go to the theater uh not so much movies uh opera read read books
from all kinds of authors uh that was important to them and once a month I had to write a report
what I did but the interesting thing there was not a there was no curriculum there was no agenda
there were no checkmarks it was all ad hoc you know now you do this and then you do that uh
and uh and a lot of this also they relied on my initiative again I mean that's part of the
evaluation too you bet uh are you able to have creative it's interesting that they're like developing
a James Bond type of character here which is what what's the reason for the opera as you become
yes cultured in a certain kind of way where perhaps that makes you uh more charming more
charismatic in terms of your ability to integrate yourself in different situations you absolutely
right I I was I was uh when I came to the U.S. after about two years roughly I was cultured enough to
not uh make a bad impression at a diplomatic soaray in Washington DC I mingled freely
yes all right and and and so the whole idea was for me to sort of reach into the upper
realms of society where the targets would be juicier than you know the worker bees
and how did you end up in Moscow why yeah what is that journey well so I uh I told you and I
started studying English so I started back from scratch you know I went they paid for a tutor
and I went from like English 101 and then I went through that in a couple of months then and then
I got another guy with whom we I expanded this we had conversations rather than working from a
textbook and I and I worked like a maniac I threw myself into the study of of of uh uh English like
you wouldn't believe um and and my inspiration came from Vladimir Lenin I had read somewhere in a
book that when Lenin was in exile he studied German and he learned 100 German words every day new
German words so I started reading newspapers and every word that I didn't know I wrote down on an
index card uh German English and I piled them up and so I really learned 100 new English words every
day I know this because I counted them and I had a system how to do this uh so you take your index
card and you have five categories there's a really good way to learn wrote by wrote uh so you got
category one that's the new ones and you got category five so you start with uh with five five
you already had to write four times if you have it right again it goes up great it goes into the
archive oh like long term cold archive yeah four if you get it right it goes to five if you get
wrong it gets relegated to three so and so you go through this and um and occasionally I would
throw the archive things back into one so I really I really acquired a phenomenal vocabulary
when I was done with my English my vocabulary was significantly higher than the average American
because I I didn't discriminate whatever word I didn't know I learned which is not necessarily
the best way because you know English has a lot of synonyms right yeah and uh and one synonym is
usually the preferable one and and I uh when I first interacted with people I very often used
the one that wasn't as good and people found that I you know I have an interesting way of talking
they didn't know what that meant but yeah what so it builds a good foundation for a language it's
getting a large vocabulary yes it's a really interesting there's something I do which is
called space repetition which is a programmatic way of doing this kind of system that you've
developed yourself which is if you successfully remember a thing it's going to be a longer time
before it brings it up to you again yeah now that requires a computer to keep track of the
information if you have cars that's a really interesting pile system one two three four five
you upgrade it one two three four five maybe I wouldn't go to the archive and go to them to
to pile one right away maybe I would go to like I don't know pile five perhaps is probably the
right place to put it because because you have to go to that full step again but that is a really
powerful way to learn definitely language but also facts like people that go to medical school
disconnected fact yeah and and you pretty much when you're done you know what you know yeah you
don't have to then again to use it to integrate it into the music of language that's more difficult
that's where you're talking about exactly right there there's a charm I mean maybe it's not good
for spy craft but there's a charm to this kind of to having an accent and using words incorrectly
but confidently there's a because language isn't a simple formula language is the play of words so
actually using the incorrect synonym you know as it uh you know if instead of saying I'm cold
saying I'm chilled yeah something like using off beat words can actually be part of the charms
that's interesting if you can learn how to use that correctly because I have no bunch of people
with the Russian accent and I feel like they get get away with saying a lot of ridiculous
shit because they're able to sort of leverage the charm of the uh non sequiturs by the way
by the way just one one thing um you talked about using a computer when I had my first personal
computer I actually wrote a program that does that it does that by the way when was that one
because you were a world class programmer for a time you're a very good programmer
when when did the first PC was probably 1984 1984 when did you fall in love with programming
when I went to college in the U.S. and part of the core curriculum was that you were required to
take a course in computer and it was mostly just you know talk but we also had to learn a language
we had to write some programs in Fortran which was what five at the time it was a
uh it was a dumbed down Fortran but listen so I I see the ability I see what what you can do with
this I programmed a sine curve and then I divided the the sine curve into really really small
rectangles and then ran the program and it came up with the right area wow this is great
it's incredible it's incredible it's so powerful it's uh you're creating you're creating a little
helper yes helps you understand the world to help you analyze the world and so on uh we'll
return to that because it's interesting okay so you have so many interesting aspects to your life
but Moscow so yeah no let me let me know let me how I was sent to Moscow okay so one day I had a
visitor from Moscow uh and he came to visit me in my apartment uh together with uh Nikolai and he
you know we talked and then he said so how's your English I said I pulled a book from the shelf and
says I can read that without the help of a dictionary oh that's interesting and he said
you know what I'm we're gonna send you a tape recorder and you just talk say something you
know for 20 minutes whatever you want to talk about uh they sent this thing and two weeks later
I was on a plane to Moscow because yeah I also spoke English so that the British variety of
English with not a strong German accent because I've always had the ability to imitate others
and sounds there wasn't an innate ability I would uh you know when when when we were in a lab
and as students I would very often do uh monologues uh imitating East German comedians
you know I just impressions yes yes I'm not good enough to to make a living out of it but
that raised some interest and so when they sent me to Moscow there was a first time on a plane
by the way um and uh I had a conversation with two ladies who spoke English one was a Russian
a professor at Lomonosov University she was obviously KGB there was a cover and the other one
was an American born lady oh by the way she was an actual professor using that as the cover or is
it just a story no I she said she was a professor she may have taught there too that's an interesting
distinction yeah one is like a story you tell people no and one is like you legit are doing the
thing but also yeah as a couple anyway that's that's an interesting interesting aspect of how
to be a good liar you might you might as well live the lie yeah exactly right uh so uh and the other
one was a middle aged the the Russian was pretty young the other one was middle aged an American
and uh and so we talked for maybe a couple of hours and then they withdrew and I was left alone
eventually my my liaison he came back in and he said it was close but the American things you can
actually uh become you get close enough to become becoming a native speaker of American English
and he said the Russian was very doubtful and so I think wishful it was a tie literally wishful
thinking prevailed so uh within a couple of weeks I was moving to Moscow and what what was the task
in Moscow and what and how long were you in Moscow two years and what was the task there
is a training or is it espionage no it was training it was so it was I the the American born became
my tutor I met with her twice a week uh I uh I also listened to a lot of BBC shortwave BBC
worldwide I read more English books so a lot of that was about the language and the culture of
English American and and I did phonetics exercises nice every night I had a tape that was about
a half hour long and they would say a word and I would repeat the word say a word repeat the word
and it was it's mostly about the vowels by the way most of the accent and uh particularly
let's say coming from German into into English but also Russian it's the vowels we're talking about
the so you would have a single word a word apple and you would just say apple yes and
American English or British English no American English and and I give you one uh example that
almost nobody gets right the difference between hot and hot you know yeah you know
hot and hot yeah and in German speakers it's very you know which one uh for everyone is different
for example uh I could say this on the podcast something that my brother struggles with I struggle
with too when I first came to this country learning English is there's differences there's embarrassing
differences uh like beach and bitch right and you get so as a young kid also you get so nervous
that I don't want to say the wrong thing I um I can also say that this is almost as a jokey thing but
there's a there's a famous philosopher Emmanuel Kant and you can guess which other word is very
similar to that so there's there's a nervousness about the what is that that's interesting I mean
in Germans probably have a different uh tension of like what is hard to learn the difference
between the pronunciation of the vowels or the control of the vowels yeah it's interesting
so you had to really master this daily exercise and you know and and this this was my discipline
I did this every night routine boring as hell uh so English was the focus and I also had interaction
with some agents who had operated in the United States as diplomats on on a diplomatic cover
they would come and talk to me a little bit and tell me and and sort of prepare me what was ahead
of me and then I did a whole lot of operational training particularly surveillance detection
that was big I also they also taught me how to drive a car in Moscow finally one skill you need
what's all surveillance detection okay so this is what when when you find out whether you're being
followed ah got it got it got it so it's the end to serve the the the abbreviation that's used in
yes in intelligent circles as str surveillance detection route you know when they say that you
know what that is and and that was it and a few other things you know one offs for instance
uh I was once uh taught uh to read silhouettes of ships when you see a ship from a distance
what kind of a ship it might be they they thought this would come in handy actually they
they uh there was in in 1982 andropov started a campaign was uh now I forget the name operation
something something where everybody who was in the west was supposed to look for signs that the
west was getting ready for a war and I had an everybody had an object to uh to pay attention to
I had a harbor and military harbor in in New Jersey near red bank it was called Earl weapon
station and this code name for that was early so they asked me to just wonder by there to see if
there was something unusual going on because the Soviet Union were at that point it was Ronald
Reagan were really afraid that Reagan was going to start a war they were absolutely 100% afraid of
him is there something memorable to you on a personal level on a philosophical level about your
time in Moscow something that kind of stays with you outside of the training stuff maybe
like the details of the train you love the answer you will love the answer uh
I was uh I was given tickets to two performances by americans uh there was a theater troop that
played our town uh and then there was this I forget the name of the guy but uh you may not
be old enough have you ever watched he ha uh maybe uh there was a it was a country music show real
kitschy but uh the star of he ha uh was giving a concert in Moscow and I guarantee you at least
half the audience were kgb oh man and at the other end the uh um the the the opposite of uh of a
highlight was my visit to the uh to to my to the mausoleum where linen is still still today
there there was so there was a nothing you know he was he was my hero but he he looked
like a wax figure and and and you walk by there there was nothing inspirational not not there
was not a religious experience nothing it was it was a big old nothing is that did did your
faith and belief in communism start to crumble at some point here is that around that was still
pretty strong what I did notice that the standard of living in in in Moscow was significantly lower
than in East Germany the uh uh in the supermarkets uh you could you could expect uh with reliability
that you can find uh canned fish and uh mineral water everything else was whatever and if you saw
a line and at a store you just line up you don't even ask what they have because if you don't like
it somebody else will it was it was uh not poverty but it was close to poverty there were a lot of
drunken men in the streets and uh this is the 80s no this is the late 70s late 70s mid to late 70s
and uh and also the they had these high rise apartment buildings that looked pretty good
from the front but you went into the backyard ouch you know yeah you're describing my childhood here
okay okay sorry uh but it's interesting even even with the professor even with everything else um
it's interesting because I think the standard of living was much lower you're right even in Moscow
yeah absolutely was though the one thing that they always had at least in my days was in those two
years there was always fresh bread and the bullets now yes yeah always yeah that's probably one of
the memories I have of childhood is well you're hungry a lot but when you eat is bread yeah and
the bread was good it was good I mean I don't I I actually wonder I wonder how good it was but I
remember it being incredibly good to me it was really good and and you know you had it from
white to very dark and and all the varieties the other thing that was good was um if you knew where
to get it Stalichnaya was four rubles not only is a good vodka but it's a cheap vodka I like it
yeah but you had to know where the you know this would be like holes in the walls someplace
well I think a lot of the way they operate I don't I wonder if he's germany's this way but a lot of
the ways that Moscow operates is you kind of you had to know yes like there's a very kind of
if you make the right friends if you give money to the right guy the guy the friend of the friend
of the friend is going to hook you up and this there's a culture that this is how you work around
a very big bureaucracy underground economy yeah underground economy yeah you have to which is a
boy such a stark contrast between between that and the United States the capitalist system
yeah that was a very big culture shock to me to understand the different way the different
fundamentally different way of life but the interesting thing is
human nature pervades both systems and there's something about the Russian system
that reveals human nature more intensely because of the underground nature of it
because you get to deal with greed and trust and all those kinds of things in the United States
there is much more power to the rule of law so there's rules and people follow those rules
they get to break the rules nonstop well in in East Germany and Russia I believe
theft if you could get away with it was part of your economic activity yeah
yeah I have a friend you know who I went to school with up until my fourth year and
we reconnected and he told me how he survived you know he would you know he would just steal
stuff and then sell it and or trade it yeah theft I mean it's a relative concept you know
you are taking stuff bribery all those kinds of things people you know corruption you know
it's a relative I'm just kidding I mean it is you have to work around the giant bureaucracy
about the the giant corruption corruption builds on top of corruption and it just becomes this
giant system that's unstable as you talked about one last word yes the two years in Moscow
taught me how to be alone I had no social interaction not with friends not with women
no I was the only interaction I had was with the folks that trained me so I was alone there was a
lonely two years for a person who who loves love yes but that prepared me for my first
year and first and second year in the United States because I could not interact socially
without giving away that something was wrong with me I had to learn how to be an American
they didn't teach me in Moscow they couldn't so if the first two years in in America you had to
kind of listen more than tell you you bet the very first year I couldn't even work because I had to
acquire the docking documents and social security card and a driver's license to get a job and then
when I had the job I worked as a bike messenger that gave me a good opportunity to listen as
as you know because these people they they weren't really very curious about me what was your name
in East Germany what was your name in Moscow what was your name in America okay so my the name I
was given at birth is Albrecht Dietrich nobody so sexy when you speak in German accent I hated that
name the Albrecht I didn't like it it was it was very rarely used my mother named me after a
famous German painter Albrecht Drer my cover name in Moscow was known as Dieter and in the
United States I became Jack Barsky in between I used a whole bunch of other names that were
associated with false passports that I used one of the names and I remember is William Dyson
because that is the name that was on the Canadian passport I used to enter the United States
so how did you enter the United States can we take the journey from Moscow to the United States
what was the assignment what was the what was that leap what was like what just one one one thing
in between I had a three months practice trip to to Canada that was that was a good idea and I got
to tell you this this one thing that happened there okay so because you know the one one thing
that I like to tell people nowadays is the one of the secrets to happiness is the ability to make
fun of the worst situations that you're in yes you see the humor yes okay so here's come here
comes something quite humorous in hindsight at least one of my the task that I had in in Canada
was to acquire a birth certificate but the name the name was Henry Van Randall who was born some
place in California and I was supposed to you know write a little letter saying I'm Henry Van Randall
please send me a copy of my birth certificate the fee is enclosed and and and I lived in a small
hotel so the return address it wasn't visible there was a hotel that was important so and it took
like three weeks and I get nothing four weeks I get nothing eventually I got annoyed and I
mustered the courage to call them up from itself from a payphone I called up the office
registrar whatever they were called in this in this town in California and I and I yelled at them
I said you got my money where's my birth certificate well a couple of weeks later it came so I see
the envelope this is the Henry Van Randall yes I had prepared the caretakers of the of the hotel to
that I'm expecting a letter from my friend so I went up to my room I opened it and I was like
yes yes this is success and and I opened this thing and it was it was a copy of a birth certificate
but it was stamped with big letters across and read deceased now think about it so here's a
debt people who's asking for that person who's asking for a birth certificate I had the presence
of mine to to leave okay I went to a couple of other cities I should have left the country
but I know that the Royal Mounted Police was following me and I was given that information
by the FBI later on and they were you were able to oh you were able to at least suspect that
at the time I would through the the the I knew that I knew that there was trouble so
my counter surveillance route SDR yes didn't discover anything so I kept on going I had to
supposed to I was supposed to visit two more cities and they were always one step behind
what what what is interesting to me is that they didn't catch me on the way out you have to show
your passport to the airline I mean I was I was known by name I would then the path because I had
to give that to the hotel right and I escaped with that so how did they do yeah they would have to
keep you on a list right yeah yeah that's interesting but that requires like a good computerized
updated yeah and this was Swiss air so well you got lucky yeah part of life is luck you bet so so
and and other than that the the trip to Canada was a big success because it it gave me the culture
shock that that I needed to not be blown out of out of the water and when I get get to the United
States so you hopped a few places in Canada and then Swiss I even had a I even had a relationship
with a young lady Canadian French Canadian regular Canadian French Canadian and she she gave me a book
Winnie the Pooh because we went to see the movie and then she wrote the dedication she says to the
nicest German I've ever met was she lying no or you don't know speaking of spy craft and that
that led to heartbreak too no that was sexual I was not at that point ready for love no ready to
return to that old well I was I was already already married in Germany okay that woman I loved we
should return to this yeah so Swiss air where did you land in the United States oh when I came
where did I land I American Airlines and a flight from Mexico City to Toronto but they made me
deep plane in Chicago I have no idea I think this was over engineering that didn't make any sense to
me you know why can't the Canadian just take a take a flight from Mexico City with this stop over
there's kind of nonsense yeah but okay but nevertheless that was it and then you landed in
Chicago right and tell me the story in America what was the day to day life now this is now
your spy your no no no I got to tell you another funny story yes so this is another there's two
things that happened that could have ended my career as a spy right then and there so I'm
so I'm arriving in in the Chicago in the evening it's already dark I had no idea what kind of
hotel to take you know I picked one out of out of yellow pages and then got a taxi when I gave him
the address he looked at me like a little funny whatever what do I know you know just keep on
going I need to get I need to get sleep because I was extremely tense you know having gone through
customs and border control so and we were going in the southern direction and I noticed that the
neighborhoods were became less and less inviting didn't didn't know what that meant either I get
into the hotel it was a five story brownstone and something else looked funny so the reception desk
was protected by plexiglass not having enough background I didn't know that this was unusual
because all I knew that there was a lot of crime in the United States so I thought maybe
every hotel was like that so I go up into my room and drink a half a bottle of Johnny Walker red
because as one does yeah because I was so damn tense I just wanted to sleep I wanted to get into
a coma which I did and and the next day I woke up with a head it was twice as big as felt twice
as big but you know I was prepared I had aspirin with me so I killed the headache and went outside
to see if I can get something to eat and so I was right smack in the middle of the south side
of Chicago I didn't know that the south side of Chicago existed I found later I found out where I
was so it was time to go very quickly go up there and at that point I decided I would I would register
at the next hotel on the Jack Barsky so I went to the bathroom and I tried to kill
kill off Mr. Dyson by burning his passport unfortunately I was not trained in how to
train passport how to how to destroy passports it was so I tried to burn it and these things
or flame retardant and it created a cloud of smoke and I'm looking up there and there's a
smoke detector yeah oh no okay so presence of mind I threw this thing in the toilet
and then then took out a pair of scissors and cut it into small pieces and flushed it down
if that smoke alarm goes off I'm busted right if somebody if if some some criminal steals
I had $6,000 on me and cash steals either my passport or my or my money or both
I don't know what to do yeah you can't go to authorities you can't do there weren't there
weren't any Russian dudes Soviets in Chicago do you have any contacts no there was no there
was no there was no plan B for Chicago at all that's an oversight I shouldn't I shouldn't
have gone to Chicago they they could have shipped me into San Francisco or Washington DC because
both of them had Soviets my end goal was was to go to to New York fine you know I would have been
a really really dangerous agent if I had gone back and worked with a KGB because I could have told
him all the things how to do it right so in that sense there is some given the scale of the KGB
there is some incompetence in this some a lot of with regard to preparing me to be an American
as it was almost total incompetent and that do you think that's representative of the way they
operate is there's an incompetence like to the logistics to the strategies involved all that
kind of stuff yeah they none of these guys had operated as illegals they they were outsiders
to American society they had interaction with Americans and but they all lived in you know
in New York they lived in their compound in northern Manhattan where they all lived together
with their families and and they most of the time they spent interacting with with themselves
with their own people at work so they really didn't integrate well they did not know what
it's like to be an American to have a job to to you know live like an American they didn't know it
it's interesting that KGB didn't put a high value to that kind of integration they didn't know what
they didn't know yeah and and by the way this was mutual do you think the CIA had had good
knowledge of the Russian culture uh same thing and so there was a lot of lack of understanding
because good good intelligence could have possibly avoided some of the high tension that
situations that we had when when in the 80s we got close to nuclear war so good intelligence
would be integrating yourself in society yes much much and understanding that Ronald Reagan
was not a warmonger but he was talking about the end times because he was a a Christian
but then that kind of integration can be dangerous because you start to question the
propaganda the narratives that on which the KGB is built oh yeah the CIA is built and and then
they they have always have had the options of ignoring the intelligence that they're getting
right yeah well let me ask you this question sort of to jump around there is a lot of conspiracy
theories in this in this current climate I mean throughout history but now especially
and some of the conspiracy theories put a lot of power in the hands of the intelligence agencies
like CIA, FSB, Mossad, MI6 they're basically the conspiracy theories go that they control
the powerful people in this world and they're able to thereby manipulate those powerful people
and manipulate the populace in order to deliver different kinds of messages and so on given your
experience with this kind of tension between competence and malevolence would you say there's
some truth to those conspiracy theories? Not one way I think I think there is there's
collusion there's collaboration but I would think that like for instance some folks in
the CIA and the FBI are being used by the ones that are really in power power's money power's wealth
I know power's not it can go both directions you can acquire wealth first which leads you to power
or you can acquire power first yeah power is also knowledge I understand and in a position in the
society in the military or in intelligence but I don't think it's a straight one way that all
the intelligence agencies control the powerful people in their country you see what's happening
in Russia I mean Putin dominates his intelligence agencies right? Well so the question is which
way the direction goes be you're saying that there is it's not one way flow of power I would
think so and I also believe it exists but it's not as prevalent as you know not every conspiracy
theory pans out and most of them don't they're just damn rumors but it doesn't mean they don't
exist I guarantee you that they exist there's collusion there's people getting together
and not necessarily preparing a specific action but more sort of a plan to go forward
and maintain the position or even you know strengthen the position that they already have
so KGB Buchen generalizes FSB CIA do you think a KGB agent would kill someone against international
law if they were ordered to do so so we talked about they did they did and there's a there's a
famous case of one but I think it's Vasily Kuklov who defected he was a killer he was a train killer
and he had had done assassinations in other countries he was sent to west Germany to kill a
defector a KGB defector and he decided not to do it he talked to the guy and he said I'm supposed
to kill you I'm not and then then he eventually wound up in the United States I have a connection
to this fellow because the KGB once asked me to go to California and see if the guy still lives and
works there and we I found him and we looked at each other so it was an active KGB agent
looking at a man that he didn't know was the KGB defector looking at each other neither one knew
who the other one was I found out later but he was able to survive yes and you know there
there have been assassinations not not a lot and you know that that we know of the good point
this is very difficult the the the question is how many lines are intelligence agencies
willing to cross to attain to achieve the goal I I think none of these agency
you sees have the ultimate line I think eventually they the last line will be crossed if they believe
it's necessary well I think you can justify a lot of things especially in this modern world
with nuclear weapons that you can justify that you're saving the world actually let me ask
a few difficult questions and we'll jump back to your time in America but
Vladimir Putin has been accused of ordering the poisoning and assassination of several people
including Alexander the Vdenenko early on all the way to Alexei Navalny do you think these
accusations are crowded in truth and we will return to a couple more questions maybe above
Vladimir Putin's early days in the KGB which would be interesting yeah there's a there's a
phrase that I like to say in responses called plausible deniability I don't think Putin gave
a direct command as they do that he would just maybe muse it would be nice if something would
happen and then somebody picks it up and does it is there can you steal man the case
that Putin did not have direct or indirect involvement with who would know who would know
you know just well the international the reputation perhaps
perhaps catalyzed by Putin himself is that he is the kind of person that would directly or
indirectly make those orders perhaps the case there is he's somebody to be feared and thereby you
yeah yeah sure but the act itself the the the poisoning of Litvinenko and oh and then the
the assassination of the Bulgarian Markov and with a with the umbrella and and they all
directly traced back to Russian Soviet intelligence and so that's enough to be feared right um my
answer that I gave you is an educated guess you know like I can't pretend to know this for sure
but it's frustrating to me because there's a lot of people listening to this would say
they would even sort of would chuckle at the naive nature of the question but if you actually
keep an open mind you have to understand what is the way that intelligence agencies function
is it possible to the head of an intelligent intelligence agency not to make direct orders
of that kind where there's a distributed now the head of the intelligence agency would
most likely give the order even though it's compartmentalized yeah but but but but not the
the head of state not maybe not the head of state although uh in the case this is the case in the
United States as well but certainly is the case in Russia there are close relationships between the
head of the FSB and the GRU and personal relationships not just even the head of the FSB
who is known jail there's interesting details especially uh coming out recently around the
war in Ukraine so let me actually ask about the war in Ukraine all right what is your analysis of
the war in Ukraine from 2014 to the full on invasion of Ukraine by Russia in 2022 in February 2022
what there's many questions we could ask one is what are the sins of the governments involved
what are the sins of Russia Ukraine America China are those sins comparable
core the good guys and the bad guys I was more than one question let me just uh give you my
the basics about this savvy observers saw this coming they were very small minority
because Vladimir Putin was pretty open about what he told the world his mission was was the
reestablishment of a strong Russia the reestablishment of something like the the Russian Empire to
unite all the Russian speaking people in under one country and the world ignored him I mean he
was open what was there was at a conference in France I believe when it we he set this out in
the open and then what we had in the United States we had wishful wishful thinking you know
Obama had this reset with Russia you know we all get friendly and then when when uh Putin invaded
Crimea we did nothing so and it and it just escalated slowly but surely
it was pretty clear and then they said uh it was I think two years ago there was an essay
published by uh Putin whether he wrote it or not doesn't matter but that was also out in public
where he was again quite clear what he was going to do now how do you do this with force and uh
and the the sins committed by the American government was that we ignored it we were in
gauge and wishful thinking and we didn't stop it with sanctions before the shooting started
to push back I don't think you're fully describing you are describing the sins of the Russian
government and Putin I don't think you're fully describing the sins of the American government
here because not only didn't you're doing you're describing miscalculation so not only did they
not pressure correctly with sanctions and so on and and and clearly respond to the actual
statements and the essays and the words spoken I know where you're going but keep on yes but
they also at the same time pressured pressured Russia and they also as as Putin himself said
sort of there's a rat and they pushed the rat towards the corner by expanding NATO and uh and
arming Ukraine and well the military industrial complex is a machine that uh that led us um and
I think a lot of younger people I mean when I came to this country and this is the country I love
of I lived through 9 11 I lived through the full roller coaster of emotion yeah I'm a
at that time before that and after it was a proud American I went through the whole roller coaster
of uh being sold a I would say a lie about the reason to invade Iraq and even Afghanistan
and I've got to live through understanding of this military industrial complex that leads to the
expansion of empires of the delusion that we have in the populace in in the government
that convinces us that we are the good guys and somehow with military force we can instill our
values and still happiness the pursuit of happiness that all men are created equal these ideas
in into other lands and we can do so with drones and we can do so with weapons and we can do so
without significant cost or our own from our own pockets and so this idea this machine doesn't
just apply to Afghanistan and rock it doesn't just apply to Yemen and Syria it doesn't just apply
to China it also applies to Ukraine it also applies to Russia agreed and two thoughts if I make
first of all one does not hear the term military industrial complex in the public discourse these
days Eisenhower warned about it Eisenhower was a capitalist he was the president of the United States
so it exists and it is very powerful the more weapons you can sell the more you have to replace
them or send over you have to replace them so yes the the other thing is there's also a messianic streak
that powers American foreign policy we want to make the world just like us why don't they get it
because they don't want to it's almost like it's not communism but it's a very similar
romantic idea that we can make the world then fashion the world the way we are and and and
that's the romantic side and the sort of honest side but it doesn't work it should it failed every
time right you know Afghanistan is a royal mess and would never become a functioning democracy
I don't know if if Ukraine can become a functioning democracy so well I don't know if American weapons
can help Ukraine become a functional democracy I yeah absolutely right but there's a huge amount
of interest in seeing the world in black and white and selling the story of the world is black
and white that Ukraine is the symbol of democracy in this east eastern European world and Russia is
the symbol of authoritarian dictatorship and the story is not so simple as as as many indices show
Ukraine and Russia are the number one and the number two most corrupt countries in Europe
they're two peas in a pod one is bigger and and and one is in this case the aggressor now
you know two peas the aggressor is still ultimately responsible and the person that
throws the first punch now there's a lot of people going to disagree where the punch came from yeah
but there is there is magnitude yes and and the struggle by Ukraine for sovereignty stretches back
to the beginning of the 20th century stretches back even further than that but there's been
the Ukrainian people or proud people and they've been in many cases tortured by those that sit in
the Kremlin throughout the 20th century the the famine in the early 30s and it's always it's never
the middle class in the upper class that suffer it's always the lower classes the peasants right
in that time that this history stretches back far and this is yet another manifestation of that
and there's a lot of interest to play China watches closely Russia America watches closely
and there's an extra caveat here that there's nuclear weapons at play as well exactly
and it's what this is the situation is as dangerous as I have lived through in my entire
life I believe and because it's not necessarily at the highest point of escalation but it will be
in my view a protracted crisis and the longer that crisis lasts the more of a chance there is
of an accident yeah one rocket yep there seems to be a strong incentive to prolong to do siege
tactics to prolong this conflict over perhaps many years which is terrifying to think about yeah
and over that one a single rocket can lead to given that there's leaders that might not that
might be losing their mind yeah and Ukraine is not part of NATO the thing I'm really afraid of
of is that somebody might think it's a good idea but for Russia so Putin might think it's a good
idea for Russia to send a message by launching a nuke against Ukraine because they're not part
of NATO so surely the West is not going to respond what is the West going to do yeah if
if Russian nukes Ukraine to send a message I don't know if anyone knows the answer to that
question but it's a terrifying question and and I don't know the exact protocol that needs to be
followed to to launch a nuclear strike from from NATO's end because we have several countries in
NATO that have nuclear weapons so for let's say for France to fire a nuke does the United States
have to agree or how does I don't know how that works I don't know if anyone knows how that works
yeah I worry now we have different very kind of anecdotal perspectives on these things but
if the people have interacted with in the DOD Department of Defense in the military
there is a compartmentalization there is a bureaucracy and within that giant bureaucracy
there's incompetence we'd like to think that there is like really well organized for really
important things there's going to be the best of the best in the world that's going to execute
on the correct decisions both geopolitically militarily all that kind of stuff and I've seen
enough to know that competence at any level of government at any level in the military is not
guaranteed let's go back to the law of hierarchy the the government is is the biggest hierarchy
there is and so invariably politicians find their way to the top and once you have politics and
dictating substantive decisions they're they're going to be weak or wrong it's I don't I don't
know how how this could work any other way there well right now we have some functional idiots
in the central United States government well let me because you did you said that I think
elsewhere you said that Putin was not a good KGB agent that's right mediocre one but
is an excellent politician yeah and a good organizer he was known as a really really
good organizer when when Yeltsin hired him as a prime minister he he cleaned up the mess to
because Yeltsin was under Yeltsin Russia deteriorated tremendously and it became sort of a mix of an
oligarchy and a criminal enterprise and chaotic so he had skills that made him a good executive
absolutely now let's go back to him as a KGB agent he was a KGB agent I mean you know according to
him once a KGB agent always a KGB agent but 16 years let's say something like this
what do you think about from your experience now you're maybe a same age as him approximately the
same age as him he's a little younger a little younger yeah what do you think about the KGB
experience he had made him the man he is what aspect of that from your own experience yeah well
how much that does that define you who you are how you think about the world how you analyze
the geopolitics of the world how you analyze human nature now I gotta tell you one thing he's he
had a different type of training than I did mine was one on one and he went to school to so to speak
so right so but but fundamentally he was not a top agent then this is very simple to there's
only one one thing you need to know he knows German pretty well so he was where was he deployed
in East Germany not in West Germany not in Switzerland not in Austria that's where they
sent the best right when we think generally we're learning here right so this is your
classification of where they send the best you know there's people classify all kinds of stuff like
what is the best university in the world what is the best football team in the world
you start to get a sense the good guys get sent the the best athletes get sent to
well we disagree on this but the football team is but you have a sense and you're saying that the
best agents would have been sent one would think so now this is not a forcing argument but
I also have it from from a word from the horse's mouth which horse I mean what kind of horse what's
the breed of the horse you know who Oleg Kalugin is and he's still he's still alive he was at one
point the head of counter intelligence for the first directorate espionage right and Putin was in
the first directorate and reported to Kalugin for a while and Oleg told me to my face that Oleg was
not an impressive that agent trainee or agent what that Vladimir Putin was not impressive not
impressive at all now he's biased given this current situation and well yeah you know he could
still make it up because he had this big ruckus when when he was in parliament and called called
Putin the war criminal about the war in Serbia not only could he make it up I wouldn't trust his
analysis I mean I have to you know what when people I've been working very hard even before
this war to try to understand objective analysis of all the parties involved you have to really
keep an open mind here to see clearly to understand if you are to try to help in some way make a better
world in this case stop this war yeah or have all the countries involved flourish bring out the
best the people remove the corruption and the greed and the destructive aspects of the governments
and let the people flourish for all that you have to put all the biases aside all the political
bickering all the I don't know all the biased analysis and there's there's a lot of propaganda
that says that in fact Putin was it was a good agent how else would he rise to the ranks right
because he was a good politician and he had made a lot of good connections and with with
in the KGB allow me to say something you just you just taught me a lesson and and and the lesson
I should have figured out myself because I keep on telling people that in the intelligence world
you never know the truth 100% so when you said oh I could make that up of course you could have
but you get to a point where you're forced to make a decision or have an opinion and then
you use your best educated guess yes so I'm I'm going to take the certainty of the statement that
I made back yes because you it's quite possible that you're right well what I've noticed about
Vladimir Putin and this is true about for example Donald Trump and all those kinds of
divisive figures that some for some reason people's opinion on the details of those people are very
sticky once you decide this is a bad guy yeah there's like like a black hole and people are not
able to think like one act at a time you don't have to like that doesn't somehow justify this
this somehow doesn't uh remove all the evil things that are done but you can analyze clearly
each of the actions and to me it is interesting to see how did this man rise through the ranks
now you're saying that to be a KGB agent there's a lot of skills involved and perhaps raw
technical skill of spycraft is perhaps not related to the skill of raising rising through
the ranks right and you're saying as a politician he was good at rising lying and influencing
uh that is something that that is significant as a significant talent and ability that an
agent must have that helps you as a politician continuing the kind of thread of the role of
KGB in defining the the heart soul and mind of latimer putin let me return to Yuri bismetov who
was a soviet kGB agent that wrote a four step framework for ideological subversion on a national
scale as practiced by the soviet union so the the four steps are demoralization destabilization
crisis and normalization he had a lot of other kind of systematic ways of describing this kind of
stuff so can you speak to some of these ideas about the systematic large scale ideological
subversion goals of the kGB is there truth to that kind of those ideas yes but i i think i
already sort of mentioned that i think besmanov was a fraud and i have i have again can you
elaborate good good arguments let's put it this way first of all we we know that the kGB was
involved in active measures which is you know you can call it fake news yeah seating fake news into
advert in the countries that are your adversaries and and the russians have been doing this lately
by meddling in our election and and focusing on the left and the right fringe and influencing
them to become more left and no more right so that and uh in vasili mertrocan uh has and has
an in one of his books uh he has a whole chapter about active measures okay so what he has to say
about the department and i forgot what department that was was the one department that was the least
desirable for kGB agents because these were desk jobs for people who had to come up with uh fake
stories that uh in countries where they didn't quite know too much about the country now there
were some successes like one of them the two uh most famous successes uh that i'm aware of is that
the canard that the AIDS virus was concocted in a cia lab and there's a lot of people around
the world believe that and the other one was that uh jad kahoover was a secret cross dressers
cross dresser that that was that that is still known by a lot of americans who over a certain age
that this was the truth but uh mertrocan actually traces it back to a story that was placed in a
sort of left wing but close to mainstream uh french magazine and it was then taken taken up by
uh more uh you know larger newspapers and and well established papers so so they had some
successes but this kind of a uh massive well thought out campaign to destabilize the united
states i don't believe the kGB was capable of doing that mertrocan seems to agree with me
me i was trained i would think you know i was one of the crown jewels of their agents
one would think that they used the best that they had to to help me how to become an american
and they didn't have a clue so how do they if you don't know how a country operates how do you come
up with with this this this kind of a very detailed uh long term plan that's that's also
timed you know two years this and when you're that and all that yeah so we should we should
actually just clarify so he he has this whole idea that there is a 15 to 20 years i needed for
demoralization yeah um where you're um you're basically infiltrating a country from a young
or people from a young age manipulating their mind you're destabilizing then that's the second
step that takes two to five years you uh target the country's foreign relations defense and economy
you create a crisis artificially and then you normalize it as as if it always was this way
so it's basically saying that the kGB is capable of at scale uh over many years
manipulate an entire population of people right and this is kind of um
um there's a lot of people that believe in conspiracy theories that are amenable to this
kind of idea now my own experience is that there is in fact just a giant amount of incompetence
and then this is something that's actually very difficult to pull off because yes it's incredibly
um incredibly difficult to achieve this kind of manipulation i think it would it would require
first of all not much bureaucracy not much slowing down you have to have incredible
in modern world digital systems that are able to do surveillance manipulation there has to
be a strategy that is carried out in secrecy across a huge number of people effectively
that also requires you hire the best people in the world and i think it's difficult to execute on
this kind of thing with if you compartmentalize because there has to be great collaboration
there has to be a great where there's a unified vision coordination and coordination across
multiple groups there has to be i mean there it's very difficult to do now nevertheless
especially with technology this becomes easier and easier so the bar becomes lower and lower to
achieve mass surveillance becomes easier and easier and easier mass manipulation through
platforms because we're now digitally connected you can now do that kind of manipulation so it
becomes more and more realistic that you could do this kind of thing but you're saying that no
intelligence first of all intelligence is hard and to do it at scale and to do it well and to do it
in a way that it's also not just collecting information about the populace but manipulating
the populace is very very difficult right now let me now give you another argument where i think
that besmanov was a fraud uh i mean i already have i have uh matroken on my side and and my
personal observation of the incompetence that i witnessed i mean they really really didn't know
what they didn't know so now besmanov was kgb where was he stationed in india
he he was a low level agent in india and i told you was the one thing that the kgb was really
good was at was compartmentalization how does besmanov in india find out about this massive
plan that should have been super secret right he made it up sorry yeah and and you know why he got
away with it because americans eat that up because it's not our fault it's like the damn russians
that doing doing all that that bad stuff speaking of the damn russians doing all that bad stuff
if you know about the internet research agency they have been doing quite a bit of damage and
i i'm now familiar with the world of enhanced artificial persons these are the avatars
on facebook and twitter and you know so forth that look like real people and and and and there are
quite a few of them and and i have a good friend who operates in in that realm and you know he he
uses for instance facial recognition when he thinks that there's a suspicious character say on
linkedin or or on facebook and very often he finds out yeah that that person exists but it's not the
person who it pretends to be so basically detecting the artificial yes enhanced artificial yes but
but he can also make them you think the united states hand in hand yeah united states doesn't do
it we do it too but uh well this is to push back against your pushback right yeah besmanov might
be a fraud uh huh but is it possible especially in the modern age that there is these kind of
of large scale systematic opera wouldn't you as a government more so uh that's investing
billions of dollars into military equipment uh in in a world that's more and more clearly going
to be defined by uh cyber war versus hot war but wouldn't you start to have serious meetings
as large amounts of hires yeah that are working at how do we manipulate the information flow
how do we manipulate the minds of the populace how do we sell them a narrative um so even though
he might have been making up a story because people eat it up could it speak to some deep
truth that's actually different than the the truth you came up in as a kgb agent i agree with you 100
percent is much easier when uh you know all you need is is an army of nerds who also know no feds
no feds nerds that's a term of endearment i love i love nerds i used to be one myself
but anyway once a nerd always a nerd so you know uh so what i was gonna say here is all you need is
an army of nerds and and what but also uh experts in the culture of the target country okay and and
nowadays the world is different there's a whole lot more fluidity there's a whole lot of more people
that like say russians for instance study in the united states chinese an army of chinese study in
the united states they they have a lot more knowledge of how we function than the kgb did
and it's vice versa uh not as many americans in in russia but we have some but the chinese and the
russians have an advantage here can i ask you a question based on your experience so i have been
talking to a lot of powerful people and some of which have very close connections to in this
particular conflict uh ukraine and russia but in other places as well i don't believe i've
ever been contacted by or interacted with an intelligent agency cia fsb mi6 massage i don't
think i had well let me say explicitly i haven't had an official conversation which is what i
assume i would have because i have nothing to hide right so i think there's no reason for people to
be secretive but would i why why is that would i know am i interesting at all how how are people
determined if they're in person of interest or not and i guess the question i mean some of it i asked
in a bit of a humorous way but also perhaps there's truth in some of the humor is what i know if i
have ever interacted with a intelligence agency spy well you you don't know that you haven't
been contacted uh but but certainly not uh you i think you you never had a conversation that
related to intelligence in any way shape or form right right like where a person another person
introduced yeah the decisions themselves or you know becomes sort of wants to be your friend and
then uh talks about these types of topics right yeah but i um there's people because because of
who i'm interacting with they're i mean even we just even with elon musk like if you think about
elon musk there's a lot of people that are um that are part of the conversations that happen
how do i know they're all trustworthy they all present themselves as trustworthy now again i
have nothing so this is this is for the intelligence agencies have nothing to hide i'm the same person
privately it's publicly um well intentioned uh real no no controlled no weird sexual stuff where
you can manipulate me um what else no drug use no drug use no no skeletons in the closet
um none of that kind of stuff but you know i don't i don't know i mean just even having
these conversations you know i tend to trust people as a default like me too and you start
when you think well especially with some of the people i've been talking with
and some of the traveling i'm doing i'm realizing there's a you know there's hard men in this world
there's military there's serious suffering and there's war and there's serious people
that are doing serious harm and so you have to be careful of thinking who to trust was with
the person approaches you with a smile and asks you a question um my my natural inclination is
that person is a cool person i'll answer the question i'll become a friend but it becomes
difficult when you realize that there's um there's things like intelligence agencies
with thousands of employees there's people that are doing major military actions that involve
tens of thousands hundreds of thousands of soldiers this is serious stuff and so how do i
how do you know how to operate in this world the folks that you're interacting with uh
have a responsibility not to tell you what they shouldn't tell you right right so and most of
them probably won't and and i'm guessing occasionally they will say well i can't go there right yeah so
so what what what you are aware of is sort of public and what you're doing is you you uh
you're collecting it and you um you editing it to some extent you're not you're not
changing the word the verbage yes you you just uh repeat what they say so from that
angle you're not you know you're not privy to any real secrets what you uh have possibly
that could be of use is you learn to get to know the person so i'm thinking as a good possibility
if you get the interviews uh in the east that somebody may actually approach you and ask you
what's what's your opinion i just hope they approach me and introduce themselves properly
i just yeah there's a kind of i mean would you know like how many russian spies are there in
the united states how many american spies are there in russia do you do you have a sense is it
no i just like with the gru no idea is it is it possible there's like tens of thousands and we're
not we're like thousands not not thousands like i used to operate we were too hard to train and we
weren't that successful to begin with but um particularly russians and chinese um you know
you know both uh governments know who is going abroad and i guarantee you there's a lot of amateur
spies they're they're being asked to you know help us out you know do something for the motherland
and we're outsourced spying yeah sort of not not serious training but yeah and yeah for instance
uh this this lady uh i forgot her first first name butina she was a rank amateur she used
social media to communicate with moscow uh so she had no training but she was reasonably successful
i mean she she got uh and and and uh um i the difference between let's say uh the current
russian intelligence and the kgb vladimir putin and his his henchmen are okay with people being caught
but because and every time i i go and talk and give a talk someplace i i'm always asked this
question how do you i mean how many russian spies do you think we have here because that it scares
the people right and putin likes to scare people the kgb was very solicitous of uh of the agents
they were you know they uh they didn't want any one of them caught right so that's that's a big
difference and uh you know so getting caught so for the fsb getting caught sends a strong
signal to the world that there's yeah there could be many more and there probably are but
and uh because also the world again there's a whole lot more travel going on a whole lot more
interaction studying abroad doing business and uh you know there's there will be attempts at espionage
probably one every minute in this country that doesn't mean they would be successful no uh
but there is a a cottage industry now that is doing quite well that teaches companies how to
you know fortify themselves against like industrial espionage or also foreign actors spying
it's all over the place yeah as it becomes easier and easier with digital
yes with cyber that becomes a serious and a very serious threat we might wind up in a world where
nobody knows anymore what's up and what's down if i worse to have a conversation with
vladimir putin and or volodomyr Zelensky is there something you would ask
about the time in the kjb the time in his past what we are all of us men and women are
creations of the experiences we have our life early on in life and through the formative
experiences successes and failures so uh yeah you you just said the keywords you know i would ask
you know without giving away anything you know just being high level your biggest success and
your biggest failure as a politician or as a kjb agent you'll be talking in the realm of uh
kjb when the wall came down and uh he was in in an office kjb office in the city of dresden and
um east germans were uh besieging uh starsy offices and they also dropped by the kjb office and uh
they they were they were pretty threatening it looked like they weren't actually storm the
office and get you know the documents and stuff like that and uh initially the first demonstration
was uh um was told that uh if they come any closer weapons would be used so they disappeared and then
they came back and uh and uh i don't know some somebody in that office called berlin and said
what are we gonna do okay are we allowed to use force and the answer came back to gobert schoff
said absolutely not and so this is where putin all of a sudden you know he was at one point uh
a member of the greatest the most powerful intelligence organization in the world and
all of a sudden he was powerless and he had to watch how you know this this was a defeat big one
yeah and and it's a supposedly a powerful intelligence agency cowering yeah sort of crawling
back into a position of weakness and he probably promised himself never again russia needs to be
great again the kjb fsb russia the russian empire needs to rise again and that there's a feeling
for him that that's as he talks about the collapse of the soviet union being a great tragedy there's
a feeling like that was uh um that was like never again yeah and and i i believe that uh
he has a he has a strong conviction uh that i don't know if he's religious he who carries
across now but i don't know what that means but somehow but that uh uh it's the destiny of the
russian nation to be great and that that is sort of that that's whether there's it's it's determined
by god or some some higher power that that is very important for him of course that nationalist
idea is uh one that americans share as well and you know it could help a nation flourish so by
itself is not necessarily a bad thing it's how it manifests itself is the question um well one
other thing is if i were to uh get a chat with the the ukrainian uh president i would ask him
how many lives what what what what what is the equation between giving up some land and how many
lives uh are worth this land and that's a it's a good way to phrase the question of course that
question gets you killed in ukraine but uh because there's another part of that equation which is
part of that equation which is it's not just land versus lives it's the sovereignty the the knowledge
that you're free and you're self determined and like it's not about like fighting for the particular
land it's saying we are messed up corrupt uh we have problems it's a messy world but it's our world
i think steven crane has a poem about like a man eating his own heart and uh he was asked
how does it taste and he said it's bitter but i like it because it is bitter and because it is
my heart and that there's a sense of like i want this is not just about land this is our nation
the same love of nation that uh putin has for russia the greater russia this vision of this great
empire uh i believe ukraine does as well there not every name you know there's levels to this game
and ukrainian people are some of the proudest people throughout the history of the 20th century
throughout the history of earth the polish people proud people you can just see in world war two
the people who said fuck you you're not having this we will die to the last man though there's
different cultures that kind of really hold their ground and ukrainian people are that
you know i have to admit in that respect i'm a i'm a bit overpowered i i could not do what
stilinski's been doing uh i uh i would sort of try try to find a way to carve out something that
i i can live with however if if that force that evil force goes gets to my family right there's
lines yes that's right you you become the world's bravest man as somebody crosses that line oh yeah
you mentioned something about you've not been to moscow back uh and that you it might not be safe
for you to travel there yes um can you speak to the nature of that you know as somebody somebody
that successfully got out of the kgb how are you still alive the number of reasons uh first of all
when my story became public that was six years ago that was pretty old right and so
uh the folks that may have a personal interest or may have had a personal interest in doing me harm
most of them don't live anymore all right that's number one number two i i did not uh
i wasn't a hired hand at german i did not betray the motherland that's a crime that is uh
uh punished by death you'll betray the motherland that's uh and um and you know and the other thing is
if there is a you know that these kinds of operations to assassination on a in another
country are very difficult to plan and implement and if there's a list of people that they don't like
i may not be at the very top having said that you know if i wind up say in moscow or even in
countries like turkey where there's a lot of lawlessness you know accidents can easily be
arranged and that's just sending another message you know just like you know we we
we can do a lot of things powerful yes do you think it's safe for me to travel in russia in ukraine
uh i think you uh you know very well how to communicate in both countries you know you've
shown this in this interaction that uh you have a lot of empathy for the people you'll be talking
with and empathy means good understanding where they're coming from and then there are lines that
you can't cross yeah like the question that i was going to ask dolinski you're not going to ask good
for you yeah isn't that the funny thing about this world there's lines there's lines everywhere
even in love even in personal relationships there's lines you should not cross yeah how did you finally
get caught i resigned in 1988 so let's actually talk about that there's a okay yeah resigned
there's there's warning signs yeah there's another yet another choice yet another cross roads yes okay
what was the calculation what was the choice to be made to give a little background it was 1988
and i was i thought they would my my uh my time in the us would soon end because you know i thought
10 to 12 years it was already past 10 years there was no indication that they that they indicated
you know that they said you know you know we're done you're done but in december of 1988 i got this
one one thing that i never wanted to see so we had a system of signals that either one of those
diplomat agents could set at a spot that i pass by every day or i could set where they would pass
by like on their way from where they live to the united nations for instance who would just drive
so and mine was my the signal spot for me was on a on a support beam for the elevated atrean
and queens and it was uh morning in december that i walked by there and routinely look at it and
never expected anything and there was this red dot it was about the size of my fist with a
you know red paint and uh and since you have done it already i can i think i can curse in this uh
moment because it's the only way i can really indicate how i felt i said oh shit because that
was the danger signal there was like you must you are in severe danger of uh and you need to get
out of the country as soon as possible there was a uh a protocol that i was supposed to follow i
wasn't even supposed to go home i just needed to was supposed to get my my reserve documents that i had
hidden in in a park in in the Bronx and made make a beeline to the canadian border i wasn't ready
so i just like ignored this thing i mean i did i couldn't ignore it but i went on to work
got on the a train went to work and then went to my cubicle and stared at the computer screen all
day because i couldn't think i could think only about what to do what to do what to do the reason
for this indecisiveness was that uh i was a father at the time i was uh my my little girl by the
name of Chelsea was 18 months old and i was there when she was born i took her to uh
uh toward the home i watched her grow up uh i watched her take the first steps and always
look at me with these big eyes lovingly look at me and uh that is when i started my reentry
into the human race because i just fell in love with this girl that's when love came back
and it was completely unexpected and uh there's a lot of fathers who understand you particularly
fathers of girls who understand what happened there and i still thought i need to go back
because you know there was there was probably some danger but i hadn't figured out how to
take care of the girl you know i leave her but you know maybe she she need to she need to have
a good life and grow up and and have a chance and her mother had a she was from south america she
had a fourth grade education that would have not worked very well so i played for time i obviously
i could be sick i couldn't you know i could be in a hospital there was a precedent where i
was sick where i couldn't communicate for about three weeks so i just uh did nothing um that was
on a monday on a thursday was my regular uh shortwave transmission i listened and they explained a
little and and and a few sentences we have reason to believe that the fbi is on your case you need
to execute the emergency procedure come home right away i still had some time because the radio
could be broken or the transmission was bad or i still could be in hospital right so i gave myself
some more time and then something happened where they forced my hand it's the only time that the
soviet agent was anywhere near me on the territory of the united states so i'm waiting for the a train
on a on a dark morning still and uh in queens and there's this uh man the short man in a
black trench coat comes up to me from my right and he whispers into my ears you got to come back
or else you're dead i can't imitate the russian accent that was a russian accent so now and it
wasn't pretty strong accent the you're dead phrase can have two meanings and an american would have
said or else you'll bust it or or else you get arrested or else you're dead is very strong so now
you have to have to take it seriously to some degree because i knew that uh they didn't they had a
history of uh assassinating or at least trying to assassinate the factor so uh that that obviously
that raised the the stakes a little bit uh but i i i just talked myself into believing this was just
uh and a bad phrasing and uh but at this point i knew and they knew that we both knew right so
there was no more guessing he found me he talked to me i know so now i had to act so in in the next
radiogram i was uh asked for uh to execute a dead drop operation where they would give me money and
uh passport and there was in a park in on statin island there was a location that i found and i
described and then i was always uh praised for my my ability to describe spots that are easy to find
so that was that was a given so and the only thing that was different in this for this operation they
they scheduled it for the dark all right so but it was still no problem because it was in a park
it was in a park and then a couple of about 100 yards in by next to a fallen tree would be hard
to miss so i go to statin island and i read the signal that said uh you i i put the container
in the drop that that was the protocol there's a signal that the person who uh who hands over
was something puts at a spot not too far from the spot itself that means i would go in and just
pick it up the reason i actually uh went to pick up this this container because there was money in
it so i didn't have to make a decision yet okay i could throw away the passport i it was like i
was still trying to figure out what to do what to do what to do so i get to the spot i get to the
tree and i had a flashlight with me the park there was nowhere in the park it was even during the
day though this park was not uh it was more almost like a little forest um and uh i don't see the
container it wasn't supposed to be a crushed oil can pretty sizable not hard to miss and i do a
double take and i look again and i look around i look around a little more see if they misplaced it
you can't find it that's the only one that one of those operations failed
and that just doesn't make a lot of sense so when as i'm walking away from this
like sort of numb emotionally i said to myself i'm staying yeah that decision kind of signal some
kind of this amuse just spoke to you that decision was made for me now you know that i'm a question
now and i think that was like god told me this you know but it was certain there it was right
there that that was it that was it and uh so what i did uh uh to uh well first of all i
divine intervention helped me to find a find a good explanation i sent them my last letter
and with secret writing i uh i communicated to them i said i i wish i could come but i can't
because i have uh contracted hiv aids that was the best lie ever because nobody wanted to have
AIDS in their country because those days it was a death sentence right and i knew i had we had
conversations of when i was back in moscow how they were snickering about what's going on in the
united states you know that that depraved culture and you see with them they they're killing each
other and the depraved culture took you took over your being and yes no and and i was and i was
convincing enough i even traced it back to a girlfriend i had once that i had actually reported
on that she you know i i interacted with this lady who had a boyfriend at one point uh who
was a drug addict and she was infected and she infected me so they believed it they sent uh
and i asked them to give my my dollar savings to my german family uh they gave them some but they
they they told they told my family that i already passed away that i'm dead they believed it 100
percent and i guess the agent who took the money took half of it for himself so that was it and uh
and the the next three months i made sure that i wasn't uh reliably at the same spot
in the same time frame so i went to work in different paths at different times just to you
know you just do a safety measure so to speak and not not not huge uh but you know i did it
it's it it kept me kept my allowed me to keep my sanity uh and and obviously after i sent the letter
i i threw the shortwave radio in the Hudson river destroyed the one time paths that i still had so
i was now uh ready to uh for a new life for a new life and live out my life as an american
undiscovered uh but you know starting to work on my version of the american dream
and uh the first action was was telling my wife the mother of this child
you know she always said wanted to have a house and said you know what we should buy a house
and a year later we moved into the suburbs and then i said we should have another child and
we had another child so and i had a career where i did pretty well uh i moved a couple of times
we wound up in a mac mansion but before that my second house was actually in pennsylvania and
rural pennsylvania and this is uh where uh i was discovered by the fbi and how did they know about
me i if it if it hadn't been for this defector basili mitrokin who was an archivist in in the kgb
archives he was actually pretty high level he was in charge of the relocation of the archive
uh from lew lew bianca to yasenovo um and he really hated the he had reason to believe he
hated the the soviet system uh i i think i remember that his son was quite ill and he
could have gotten treatment in england and he was not allowed to to travel to england with his son so
he his hatred he tried to figure out what to do and how to do damage to that system so he started
copying notes little little slips of paper handwritten that he smuggled out in his underwear
and in socks over the years and then he transcribed them with a typewriter and then put the the
pieces of paper uh into some kind of a container and and and buried this in his dacha it was i
believe in 1992 when he showed up that was already the the soviet union was gone so he showed up at
the u.s embassy in moscow and told him what he had and it was on a weekend and apparently there was
a junior person in charge and he said you know what what you got we are not interested in it's
really old uh that's a career limiting move right uh because uh vasily mitrok and then uh made his
way to one of the Baltic republics and uh contacted mi6 and they said come on in old fellow we have a
cup of tea and so they they managed to get this stuff out of the dacha and get it to england and
eventually uh the mi mi6 shared it with the fbi and uh there wasn't a whole lot of information
about me it was very very little it was like there's a person by the name of jack borsky who
is an illegal operating in the northeast of the united states now if it was jim miller
they wouldn't have found me jack borsky was easy to find so they checked social security and jack
borsky was uh had gotten his social security card at the age of 33 bingo okay the all they
knew though was that i wasn't illegal that i was still living there they didn't know whether i was
active inactive uh they and the other thing that they knew that i was a really really well trained
agent because i was still there right so um they took uh i think almost three years to investigate
me watch me from a distance because you know if i was still active i would would have found out that
somebody's investigating so you started being less and less active in terms of oh i stopped
completely what i mean is oh surveillance detection yes sir the detection after three months i stopped
altogether okay yeah good point and fbi is still very careful they were very careful they they pretty
much watched me and then and at one point i had a house in the country with one neighbor at one
point that that house was for sale so the fbi bought it and they put a couple of agents there and
just keep a closer eye on me uh there was no indication that uh i was still active but they
were still cautious and uh but at one point they uh they were able to plant a bug in my kitchen
a listening device and uh i my wife and i didn't get along very well you know there was a lot of
friction and she was constantly complaining about things and you know i got sick and tired of it
and one day we had an argument in the kitchen and then i i chose to deploy the nuclear option
and that is that is telling her what i sacrificed to be with her to so she would understand that
i am there on her side i'm supporting her if something doesn't quite fit it is not because
i don't love the both of them chelsea and and penelope so i when i said that the listening
device was active so the fbi was hearing my confession i was once a kgb agent blah blah
blah blah blah and and i quit because uh then because of uh and then stayed stayed here because
of you and chelsea and um that also made it clear to the fbi that i wasn't active anymore
no they had both of that so now uh they knew uh an attempt to turn me would have been useless
because you know because you know you turned somebody who's active but they figured they had
but there was enough reason to treat me nicely because uh they figured i had a lot of information
that was as as aged as it was but it was still important for the fbi to get to know
and so one day it was a friday evening i i'm driving back home from the office
and i'm being stopped by a um a state uh state state police um as i'm going through the toll
oh it's a bridge over the Hudson and then they had to pay a toll and he waived me he got me right
where stopped and he said could you please uh move over here it's a routine traffic stop
he thought nothing of it i had forgotten at that point that i once was a spy you know like this was
gone and uh and then he said could you please step out of the car that should have uh aroused my
suspicion that's unusual right routine traffic stop uh yeah i did it no problem and then again
somebody came from the right came into my view and he flipped this uh id and i said fbi we would
like to have a talk with you now this is uh my now friend joe reilly who who actually is uh the uh
he's the godfather of my of trinity my last child but anyway uh he told me later that when when
i heard that phrase all the blood left my face it became totally white
um but i recovered very quickly and he said it himself so you know he they took me to a vehicle
and uh there was another agent in the vehicle and he had a gun strapped to his ankle so
that was pretty real first question i had so am i under arrest and the answer was no
no and then my instinct kicked in uh in my ability to to operate and very well under
high pressure situations and i asked him so what took you so long
you know the intent of that was to um to uh defuse any kind of tension
and i saw a smile instant friends uh yeah well i i knew i knew that uh i had to make them like me
and i'm i think by now i know i'm a pretty pretty likable person so i would say so so uh and i when
when they took me to a motel which they had rented there was an uh two two wings at a
right angle they they had one they bought all the rooms in one wing and they had a guard at
each end of that wing and they took me in the middle and uh there were some props there
some binders with labels and i i immediately thought you know this is pretty silly because
what what i what i noticed that the own the labels all referred back to my early years
i knew that they didn't know much else so um i told joe that afterwards and like that was not
a great idea but anyway uh but but i volunteered i made the following statement before we even
started the the uh interview i said i know there's only one way for me to and my family
to have a chance to get through here without much damages if i'm if i'm completely 100%
cooperative and is my intent to do that exactly that all right so we we spent about two hours
in the interview they allowed me to call my wife tell her that i'm going to be late that
indicated to me already that they would let me go and after two hours they let me go um
but they had the area covered with all bunch of people and the head of that that team
talked to me and he says if you think of running we got every intersection in this area covered
you can't i didn't say anything but you know i had no no thought of running so and that was
the beginning of uh another phase of my life where i was cooperating with the fbi for quite a
while and living still undercover for several years until i had real good documentation
and became an american citizen uh seven years ago uh today seven years ago so recently uh yeah
quite recent the bureaucracy took a long time to figure out how to how to make me real and
and also not put me in in in these witness protection program you know to keep my name
and then just you know make everything like official so for instance i had to change my
birth year uh simply because if i jack boski was born in 1944 if i kept 1944 the fbi would have
helped me commit a crime because i would have uh collected social security of four years sooner
so and anyway uh details of that yes it it took quite a while and when i finally got the call
from the office of homeland security uh since the lady says uh this is agent so and so uh
from homeland security can you comment to the office tomorrow and i said um let me look at my
calendar and then i said wait a minute what am i talking about what time do you want me to be there
because i had waited for that moment for a long time and uh i was sworn in right then and there uh
it was a good feeling to walk out of there because i i had a country again you know and i love this
country just as much as you said you love it uh with all its words and its problems that we're
going through right now um and then the last thing that changed my life again and i don't want to
get into details because it's a little complicated story i never wanted to be a public person uh and
then i was discovered to a number of uh uh dots that were unlikely to be connected i had to do
with a relative with with a half brother of my wife who lives in germany uh was taken to uh to
uh germany with by his mother who came to visit somebody not us but that somebody that he came
to visit uh lived 50 miles from our house and that my my wife and and this half brother never
never met in person before they knew about each other through social media and when he found out
my background he he was a uh conductor of the german railroad at the time he said oh this is a
big story i'm going that's going to be big big big okay well he happened to know this one person
who happened happened to know uh uh one of the star reporters of death spiegel and uh after she
did some research and determined that i was real she was on my case and she happened to know uh
steve croft the guy from 60 minutes is she all these connections i had nothing to do with it
that's how life works dots get connected somehow sometimes yeah most of us it doesn't stuff happens
get lucky you you don't know what happened a few times in your life uh yeah i think i'm
must be part i wish too yeah so uh it's uh it's been it's been an interesting ride
um i'm just still shaking my head about all the stuff that happened oh it's been a fun one what
you wrote uh because i'm allowed to leave behind a documented legacy of my unusual life yeah i'm
praying that the legacy will be described by a single word love so let us return to the thing
we started the conversation with which is love yeah what role does love play in this human condition
in your life and yeah in our life here together i i give you an answer like telling you what happened
one day i i gave a presentation at microsoft headquarters that's a strange beginning
story but yes no that's not a love story and then so there's this there's this young this
beautiful young lady sitting in the back and she's she's paying a lot of attention found out later
that her her her job at microsoft job job title was story teller it's soft marketing right
yeah you could say that yeah but but that's if you can't afford somebody like that that's that's
good anyway she uh question and answer she raised her hand and she asked me all the things
that you have done and you've experienced what's the number one lesson you've taken away from
from your life that was a new question for me i never never been asked that question
and i i thought about about it for 20 seconds and then i came up with this uh this phrase
that we all know love conquers all because in my life it did in the end and uh and it's uh
it's the strongest human emotion and that is what makes us human really and you spoke about the i mean
offline as i've spoken with you it's it's clear to me how transformative how powerful the life of
your children are your your daughters in your life and who you are and and why you think life is
beautiful and why you think this country is beautiful now that um that i'm pretty mature
to put it mildly uh i'm i'm also more loving towards many more people
you know these things like uh random acts of kindness for strangers i do them i'm looking
for them now and you know what it's good for me well welcome to texas because this random kind
acts of kindness stranger seems to be a way of life which is one of the reasons i love it here
it just reminds me why i love human beings which is that they there's just this warmth this connection
yeah and georgia is the same thing yeah amen um do you have any regrets do you looking back at life
do you wish you've done something different well i i could have but i then i would have had it would
have a different regret i betrayed the wife the german wife that i loved i really did love her
and i betrayed her but if i don't betray her then i i betray the child
that is a source of so much love for you now so maybe life is a kind of um you get to choose
your regrets you don't yeah it's a little it's a it's a little bit um of a strange way of putting
it but i there's no other choice and i tell you what what i don't regret and and that's
that may be you probably understand it now because you have enough background about me i don't regret
having lied to my mother because i had no really strong emotional relationship with her she took
care of me she was proud of me but we didn't hug we didn't we didn't interact emotionally whatsoever
so you don't feel like you betrayed that i love that that uh well i i did i know that i know that
she uh she was looking for me uh until she day the day she died she she wrote a letter to president
Gorbachev asking him for help to locate me uh she she checked with a stasi she just was
like hell bent on finding me and couldn't find me so she passed away without knowing
what happened to me now there was this uh this rumor that uh was flying around and she
possibly may have bought into that rumor because my cover for uh when i went to the united states
was that i uh changed careers again and i joined a an institution in Kazakhstan that did space
research in the cosmos something something uh and i had a i had a piece of paper that
that uh invited me to start there and it was the it was a forgery that inter cosmos didn't
never existed but but people knew that in Kazakhstan there were a super secret uh in
facilities so and some one of my classmates old classmates from high school started the rumor
that i died in a rocket accident and everybody knew that so when i came back to germany went back
to germany i found the telephone number of this girl that had dumped me i called her and i said
i said so so guess who this is but maybe you hold on to your chair she says yes i said this is albrecht
it's a good payback no we actually met so there's two elderly people in their 60s
who meet each other after so many years and uh the one that ended the relationship started
the conversation by saying you know what i made a really bad mistake and and the tears
came down her cheeks i wasn't asking for that i wouldn't i wasn't happy about it but it did
feel good now now uh a while later uh i knew why she said she made a mistake i met her husband
yeah i mean there's uh this there's a town ways is a song called martha where he made
where an older gentleman calls somebody he's to love and they have a conversation they're
both married now and it's sometimes you can meet people from your past and it gives you a glimpse
of a possible different life you could have oh yeah and you know i was actually when she said i
made a mistake and i was thinking to myself no you didn't there was none there was nothing left
there was nothing left uh and also the person that she became uh personality wise wasn't as
as attractive as as i remembered her you know it's puppy love you know but still love yeah it
was it was passionate love for sure and uh i i would have uh i would have thrown myself under
the bus if i could save her it was that strong and just as strong as the love for my two girls
yeah life is full of moments and periods like that of love and that's what makes life so
so freaking awesome but it does come to an end and so does this conversation i guess
yes no this goes on for many more hours but yes uh do you think about your own death
huh do you think about death do you think about your own death yes are you afraid of it yes
even though i'm a christian uh
as a christian do you have a sense what's coming after or is it full of uncertainty
i have a hope i have a hope uh you know um there there's a lot of uh there's a lot of christianity
which is quite logical a lot of christianity which is also you know the life of christ there's a lot
of a lot of proof uh but you know and i became a christian uh starting with a head and and and i was
already quite old and i uh you know when you don't when you don't get this faith very early uh it's
it's it's tougher to buy into everything you know there are some there are some things that are
difficult for me to understand and and believe but but there's many many other things that
i can't explain only with the existence of a god but whether he lets us go again for in eternity
i just hope i won't convince somebody else at this point which is doesn't make me a really really
good christian because i'm supposed to evangelize but there's still a fear yeah there's a fear and
a hope uh on the other hand uh i know that you see see this this is this is how i approached the
last years of my life uh i will not i will not mentally or physically get the crap it i will
do everything i can do to be alert and fit i still run i run four or five times a week
and i'm going to start lifting weights again good you stay physically and mentally sharp yes
go out with guns blazing that's that's and i once read a book written by a by a medical doctor
he said most people uh uh when when when when they're becoming mature that the the rest of their
life is a slow downward move and the not for you no the the last years are pretty bad
he said you got to do this boom that's that's pretty good advice from a doctor um and if
nothing else from christianity uh whichever parts you take on one of the big ones is love
yes that's something you've lived from the very beginning before yes before god was part of your
life before anything was part of your life it seemed that love was part of your life and
was been a consistent threat throughout yes sir and uh there's there's a short sentence in in the
bible it says god is love and and the and oh the other thing is i want to say that the christian
morality is is i'm i can sign that with my blood okay god is love amen jack you're an
incredible person had lived an incredible life thank you for talking today thank you for telling
your story uh thank you for being who you are and thank you for being um all about love this is a
this is a beautiful conversation was an honor thank you and uh appreciate the tough questions
that you asked thanks for listening to this conversation with jack barski to support this
podcast please check out our sponsors in the description and now let me leave you with some
words from edwards noden you can't come up against the world's most powerful intelligence agencies
and not accept the risk if they want to get you over time they will thank you for listening and
hope to see you next time